doi: 10.1111/cei.13329

REVIEW SERIES: TRANSLATING IMMUNOMETABOLISM

Clinical and Experimental Immunology

R E V I E W  A RT I C L E 

Series Editors: Sarah Dimeloe and Claudio Mauro

Metabolism at the centre of the host–microbe relationship

OTHER ARTICLES PUBLISHED IN THIS REVIEW SERIES
Translating immunometabolism: towards curing human diseases by targeting metabolic processes underpinning the immune response. Clinical and Experi-
mental Immunology 2019, 197: 141-142.
T cell metabolism in chronic viral infection. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 2019, 197: 143-152.
Sculpting tumor microenvironment with immune system: from immunometabolism to immunoediting. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 2019, 197: 153-160.
Sensing between reactions – how the metabolic microenvironment shapes immunity. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 2019, 197: 161-169.
Altered metabolic pathways regulate synovial inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 2019, 197: 170-180.
Immune cell metabolism in autoimmunity. Clinical and Experimental Immunology 2019, 197: 181-192.

K. M. Maslowski
Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy 

and Institute of Metabolism and Systems 

Research, University of Birmingham, 

Birmingham, UK. 

Accepted for publication 16 May 2019 

Correspondence: K. M. Maslowski, 

University of Birmingham, Institute of 

Immunology and Immunotherapy and 

Institute of Metabolism and Systems 

Research, Birmingham, UK.E-mail: 

k.m.maslowski@bham.ac.uk 

Summary

Maintaining  homoeostatic  host–microbe  interactions  is  vital  for  host 
immune function. The gut microbiota shapes the host immune system and 
the  immune  system  reciprocally  shapes  and  modifies  the  gut  microbiota. 
However,  our  understanding  of  how  these  microbes  are  tolerated  and  how 
individual, or communities of, gut microbes influence host function is lim-
ited. This review will focus on metabolites as key mediators of this complex 
host–microbe  relationship.  It  will  look  at  the  central  role  of  epithelial  me-
tabolism in shaping the gut microbiota, how microbial metabolites influence 
the  epithelium  and  the  mucosal  and  peripheral  immune  system,  and  how 
the immune system shapes microbial composition and metabolism. Finally, 
this  review  will  look  at  how  metabolites  are  involved  in  cross-talk  between 
different  members  of  the  microbiota  and  their  role  during  infections.

Keywords:  autoimmunity,  dysbiosis,  host-pathogen  interactions,  infection, 
inflammation, physiological hypoxia

Introduction

The  intestinal  tract  is  colonized  by  a  plethora  of  microbes 
known  collectively  as  the  gut  microbiota.  From  ants  to 
humans,  these  gut  microbes  play  important  roles  in  main-
taining  host  physiology:  from  nutrient  acquisition  and 
synthesis, energy homoeostasis, maintenance of colonization 
resistance and immune development and maintenance [1,2]. 
Dysbiosis,  meaning  a  disruption  in  the  normal  microbiota, 
is  associated  with  a  plethora  of  immune,  metabolic  and 
even  neurological  diseases  [3–6].  A  common  trait  in  dys-
biosis  is  a  shift  from  obligate  anaerobes  to  facultative 
anaerobe  or  aerobic  microorganisms  [7,8].  Causes  of  dys-
biosis  include  environmental  factors  such  as  antibiotic  use 
and  western-style  high-fat  diet  [3],  but  host  genetic  factors 
that regulate gut epithelial function and oxygen metabolism, 
or  disease  states,  may  also  underlie  dysbiosis  [3,7,8].  As 
such,  it  is  often  uncertain  whether  dysbiosis  causes  disease 
or is a result [9]. While the understanding of host–microbe 
interactions has advanced enormously over the past 20 years, 
there  is  still  much  more  yet  to  be  defined.  With  rapidly 
advancing  multiomics  technologies  we  are  gaining  insight 

into  how  metabolism,  and  metabolites,  are  key  to  support-
ing  the  host–microbe  relationship.

Colonic epithelial metabolism shapes gut microbial 
composition and vice versa

The  intestinal  epithelium  is  at  the  interface  of  host  and 
microbe interactions. Epithelial integrity is vitally important 
for  maintaining  host  health,  as  loss  of  barrier  integrity 
can lead to dissemination of intestinal bacteria, disruption 
of nutrient acquisition, water loss and activation of mucosal 
inflammation.  Epithelial  metabolism  has  been  proposed 
to  be  central  in  establishing  the  hypoxic  environment  of 
the  colon  lumen  that  is  critical  to  maintaining  obligate 
anaerobic  commensal/mutualistic  microbes  [7],  but  the 
main energy source of colonocytes is butyrate, a metabolic 
by-product  of  the  gut  microbiota,  suggesting  that  micro-
biota  presence  is  the  first  most  important  step  for  estab-
lishing the host–microbe interface. This cyclical relationship 
between  host  epithelial  metabolism  providing  a  niche  for 
gut microbes and gut microbes providing an energy source 

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society 
for Immunology, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 197: 193–204
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creat ive Commo ns Attri bution License, which permits use, distribution and 
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

193

for  the  epithelium,  make  it  difficult  to  dissect  the  under-
the  basis  of  host–microbe 
pinning  mechanisms  at 
homoeostasis.

Members  of  the  healthy  gut  microbiota  are  important 
for  the  digestion  of  complex  plant  polysaccharides  (fibre) 
from  the  diet  by  fermentation  and  as  such,  germ-free 
mice  exhibit  an  enlarged  caecum,  due  to  the  build-up  of 
undigested  dietary  fibre,  and  defects  in  energy  har-
vest  –  particularly  in  colonocyte  energy  homoeostasis 
[10–17].  Fermentation  of  dietary  fibre  results  in  the  pro-
duction of short chain fatty acid (SCFA), including acetate 
(C2),  propionate  (C3)  and  butyrate  (C4).  It  has  long  been 
established  that  colonocytes  preferentially  utilize  butyrate 
as  an  energy  source,  and  doing  so  utilizes  oxygen,  with 
butyrate  metabolism  accounting  for  approximately  85% 
of oxygen consumption by colonocytes [17–21]. Germ-free 
mice  exhibit  decreased  epithelial  nicotinamide  adenine 
dinucleotide  hydrogen  (NADH)/NAD+  and  ATP  levels, 
marked  by  decreased  mRNA  and  protein  expression  of 
various  genes  involved  in  metabolism  [17],  which  high-
lights  the  importance  of  the  microbiota  for  epithelial 
metabolism.  Host  colonization  starts  from  birth  (the  fetus 
is  considered  largely  sterile)  and  during  the  first  months 
and  years  microbes  inhabiting  the  gut  undergo  successive 
waves of colonization. First, pioneering aerobic or faculta-
tive anaerobes dominate before obligate anaerobes assemble 
and  diversity  appears  [22–24].  Experiments  in  germ-free 
mice  indicate  that  obligate  anaerobes  cannot  colonize  the 
intestine  without  prior  colonization  with  aerobic  or  fac-
ultative anaerobes [25], which suggests that these pioneers 
are  involved  in  establishing  a  relationship  with  the  host.
Several  studies  have  begun  to  unravel  the  pathways 
involved  in  regulating  colonic  epithelial  metabolism  and 
the  interplay  between  epithelium  and  gut  microbiota. 
[7,17,21,26–28]. As colonic epithelial cells differentiate they 
acquire  expression  of  peroxisome  proliferator-activated 
receptor  gamma  (PPARγ)  [29],  which  activates  fatty  acid 
metabolism  enabling  mitochondrial  β-oxidation  and  oxi-
dative  phosphorylation  with  butyrate  as  the  fuel  source 
[17,27].  This  utilizes  large  amounts  of  oxygen,  causing 
very low levels of oxygen at the mucosal surface (<10 mm/
Hg  =  <1%)  [30–32].  Limited  oxygen  diffusion  from  the 
mucosal  tissue  into  the  gut  lumen  makes  the  hypoxic 
environment  suitable  for  harbouring  obligate  anaerobic 
microbes  [7,27].  Obligate  anaerobic  microbes  then  pref-
erentially  occupy  this  niche,  preventing  growth  of  faculta-
tive  anaerobes  [7].  A  further  layer  of  complexity  is  that 
butyrate  itself  activates  PPARγ  [33],  making  a  closed 
circuit  of  mutual  benefit,  but  also  making  it  difficult  to 
ascertain  where  the  cycle  initially  starts  (Fig.  1).  As 
described  above,  obligate  anaerobes  cannot  colonize  a 
germ-free  host  without  the  prior  colonization  with  an 
aerobic organism. This suggests that early microbial signals 
may  be  required  to  instigate  the  transcriptional  network 

that activates PPARγ and subsequent high levels of oxygen 
utilization.

Given  that  enterocytes  at  the  tip  of  the  colonic  crypt 
exist  in  a  virtually  hypoxic  environment,  they  must  need 
to  adapt  to  these  conditions  to  prevent  cell  death.  It  has 
been  demonstrated  that  butyrate  metabolism  and  subse-
quent  oxygen  utilization  is  sufficient  to  stabilize  hypoxia-
inducible factor (HIF) in the colonic epithelium [21]. HIF 
stabilization is important for activating a cellular signature 
of  physiological  hypoxia,  inducing  numerous  targets  that 
are  involved  in  maintaining  barrier  function  [34].  For 
example,  HIF  binds  to  intestinal  trefoil  factor  (ITF),  an 
important mediator of barrier function [26]. Thus, entero-
cytes are adapted to function and maintain barrier integrity 
within  this  physiological  hypoxic  environment.

Together,  these  studies  suggest  that  establishment  of 
the  transcriptional  networks  that  enable  high  oxygen 
consumption  by  colonocytes  and  ability  to  function  in 
physiological hypoxia is critical to establishing the host–
microbe  relationship,  and  that  early  pioneering  gut 
microbes may be required to initiate such transcriptional 
networks. Perturbations in epithelial metabolism (genetic, 
disease,  damage,  other)  or  perturbations  in  the  gut 
microbiota  (antibiotics,  diet,  infection,  inflammation, 
other)  could  disrupt  this  host–microbe  metabolic  inter-
dependence.  Future  studies  looking  to  unravel  the  com-
plex  interplay  between  host  epithelium,  microbiota  and 
establishment  of  this  physiological  hypoxia  may  need 
to  look  at  the  events  during  early  host  colonization  in 
order  to  understand  more  clearly  what  the  first  signals 
are  that  activate  this  cyclic  interaction  between  host 
and  microbe.  These  pathways  are  less  studied  in  the 
small  intestine,  but  physiological  hypoxia  is  also  appar-
ent  in  the  small  intestine  [35].  Future  studies  might 
also  look  into  the  effect  of  fluctuations  in  blood  flow 
and  thereby  oxygen  abundance,  which  occurs  following 
feeding.  Just  a  fraction  of  mucosal  capillaries  are  used 
under  fasting  conditions,  whereas  in  the  fed  state  intes-
tinal  blood  flow  can  increase  up  to  200%  [35].  An 
interesting  question  is  whether  an  overfed  state,  such 
as  that  which  typically  occurs  in  developed  countries 
where  food  is  abundant,  could  lead  to  increased  oxy-
genation  of  the  intestinal  villus  and  lumen  leading  to 
altered  microbiomes  overserved  in  western  cultures, 
contributing  to  dysbiosis  and  disease  development  or 
amplification.

Commensal metabolites and their effects on the 
intestinal epithelium

The  gut  microbiota  have  enormous  effects  on  the  host, 
not  only  through  the  presence  of  microbe-associated 
molecular patterns (MAMPs), but also through metabolites 
they  generate.  As  discussed  above,  fermentation  of  dietary 

194

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society for 
Immunology, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 197: 193–204

K. M. MaslowskiREVIEW SERIES: TRANSLATING IMMUNOMETABOLISMFig. 1. Metabolic interplay between host and gut microbes. Colonic epithelial metabolism of butyrate is central to establishing the host–microbe 
relationship. Butyrate is a by-product of fermentation of dietary and host-derived complex carbohydrates. Certain species of the gut microbiota are 
responsible for short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) production (acetate, propionate and butyrate); these are critical members of the community and 
dysbiosis is often characterized by their loss. Enterocytes at the tip of the villi are main users of butyrate; they express Peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor gamma (PPARy) (which can be induced by butyrate) which activates β-oxidation and oxidative phosphorylation. High amounts of 
oxygen are consumed in this process, making the top of the intestinal crypts physiologically hypoxic. This ensures limited oxygen diffusion into the 
gut lumen, thereby creating an environment suitable for obligate anaerobes. Hypoxia induces hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), which activates a 
transcriptional network important for maintaining epithelial integrity. SCFA also have a variety of effects on the mucosal and peripheral immune 
systems, largely acting in a regulatory capacity, limiting inflammatory responses. They also regulate immunoglobulin (Ig)A production via retinoic 
acid production by dendritic cells, which in turn also modulates microbiota composition.

important  for 

fibre  results  in  SCFA  production,  and  butyrate  is  particu-
larly 
intestinal  epithelial  homoeostasis. 
Butyrate  also  has  further  effects  on  epithelial  cells  through 
inhibition  of  histone  deacetylases  (HDACs)  [36]  and 
butyrate,  as  well  as  the  other  SCFAs,  acetate  and  propion-
ate, also have roles in regulating immune functions, which 
will  be  discussed  later.  Aside  from  SCFA,  many  other 
metabolites  have  been  found  to  directly  influence  the 
intestinal  epithelium,  which  will  be  discussed  more  here.
Lactic-acid producing bacteria (LAB) are known to exert 
a  range  of  beneficial  effects  on  gut  homoeostasis  and 
mucosal  and  systemic  immunity  [37–40],  but  the  mecha-
nisms  of  action  are  not  well  characterized.  A  recent  study 
has  shown  direct  effects  of  lactate  produced  by  LAB  on 
Paneth  cells  and  submucosal  stromal  cells  via  G-protein 
lactate-specific 
coupled  receptor  81  (GPR81)  [41],  a 

receptor  [42–44].  Production  of  Wnt  ligands  by  Paneth 
cells  is  important  for  the  maintenance  of  stem  cells  [45]. 
Intestinal stromal cells and subepithelial mesenchymal cells 
also  express  Wnt  ligands,  and  have  also  been  shown  to 
support  intestinal  stem  cells  [46,47].  Lee  et  al.  [41]  found 
that  GPR81  is  expressed  on  Paneth  and  submucosal  stro-
mal  cells,  and  that  engagement  of  lactate  induced  Wnt 
ligands  resulting  in  differentiation  of  intestinal  stem  cells 
[41].  Functionally,  lactate  provided  by  LAB,  or  supple-
mentation in the drinking water, improved intestinal repair 
following  radiation  and  chemotherapy-induced  damage 
when  given  prophylactically  [41].  LAB  deficient  in  lactate 
dehydrogenase,  and  thereby  lactate  production,  could  not 
exert  this  beneficial  effect,  and  Gpr81–/–  mice  have  defec-
tive  intestinal  regeneration  due  to  impaired  Wnt3  activa-
tion  [41].

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society 
for Immunology, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 197: 193–204

195

Metabolism at the centre of the host–microbe relationshipREVIEW SERIES: TRANSLATING IMMUNOMETABOLISMAmino acid metabolism is regulated by the gut microbiota, 
which  affects  the  amount  and  type  of  amino  acids  available 
to  the  host  [48–50].  Tryptophan  is  an  essential  amino  acid 
important  for  the  generation  of  a  range  of  bioactive  mol-
ecules,  including  serotonin  and  melatonin  [51].  The  host 
utilizes  the  majority  of  diet-derived  tryptophan,  but  the  gut 
microbiota  also  metabolize  a  portion  resulting  in  indole-
containing molecules [52,53]. Several of these are aryl hydro-
carbon  receptor  ligands  and  regulate  mucosal  immunity, 
which will be discussed in later sections, and is also discussed 
in  detail  in  a  review  by  Roager  and  Licht  [54].

One commensal, Clostridium sporogenes, metabolizes all 
three  aromatic  amino  acids  (AAA),  including  tryptophan. 
Analysis  of  the  metabolic  pathway  involved  revealed  that 
there  are  12  resulting  metabolites,  nine  of  which  accu-
mulate in host serum, including indolepropionic acid (IPA) 
[52].  IPA  was  found  to  be  important  for  maintaining 
barrier  integrity,  and  lack  of  IPA  and  the  other  AAA 
metabolites  increased  intestinal  permeability  [52,55].  IPA 
was  shown  to  bind  epithelial  pregnane  X  receptor  (PXR), 
inducing  down-regulation  of  tumour  necrosis  factor 
(TNF)-α and up-regulation of junctional protein-encoding 
mRNAs  [55].  Systemic  immunity  was  affected  by  dimin-
ished  IPA  production,  with  increased  percentage  of  neu-
trophils  and  CD8  T  cells  and  increased  anti-C.  sporogenes 
immunoglobulin  (Ig)A  [52].  This  work  demonstrates  that 
active  maintenance  of  the  intestinal  barrier,  as  instructed 
by  microbial  metabolites,  is  critical  for  maintaining  the 
host  tolerance  of  the  gut  microbiota.

Tryptamine  is  a  tryptophan-derived  monoamine,  which 
has structural similarity to 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) 
and  is  produced  by  gut  microbes.  Bhattarai  et  al.  [56] 
observed  that  microbial-derived  tryptamine  activates  the 
5-HT4  receptor  (5-HT4R)  on  the  intestinal  epithelium, 
increasing  colonic  secretion  and  decreasing  the  time  taken 
for  gastric  emptying  (transit  time).  Thus,  this  microbial 
derivative of tryptophan may have important roles in regu-
lating  responses  to  infection  which  rely  on  intestinal  secre-
tions to flush out the pathogen [56]. Tryptamine, or bacteria 
engineered  to  produce  tryptamine,  may  also  represent  a 
novel  treatment  for  diseases  distinguished  by  slow  transit 
time, 
(IBS). 
Pharmacological  agonists  of  the  5-HT4R  have  been  trialled 
for  IBS;  however,  significant  side  effects  can  occur  due  to 
activation of this receptor on other cell types, such as heart 
muscle  cells.  Thus,  specific  delivery  of  a  5-HT4R  ligand  to 
the  gut  would  be  a  desirable  treatment  option  [56].

syndrome 

irritable 

bowel 

such 

as 

Effect of commensal metabolites on host immune 
function

Microbial  diversity  has  been  identified  as  an  important 
factor in mediating immune development and maintenance 

of  homoeostasis.  Many  inflammatory  and  autoimmune 
diseases  are  associated  with  dysbiosis,  but  whether  dys-
biosis  is  the  cause  or  consequence  of  these  diseases  is 
difficult  to  dissect.  In  any  case,  dysbiosis  at  least  acts  to 
amplify  inflammation  [9].  Sequencing  of  human  micro-
biomes  has  revealed  a  wide  variation  in  species  composi-
tion,  thus  making  it  difficult  to  ascribe  beneficial,  or 
detrimental, effects to specific species. Instead, it is emerging 
that  common  functional  activities  and  metabolites  are 
conserved between individuals. Thus, it appears that func-
tional  metabolic  niche  fulfilment  is  more  important  than 
specific individual species within the microbiota [9,57,58]. 
Numerous  metabolites  present  in  the  circulation  are 
dependent  on  the  presence  of  gut  microbiota  [53];  thus, 
it  is  not  surprising  that  the  microbiota  can  exert  effects 
on  the  host  beyond  the  gut,  including  effects  on  host 
metabolism,  the  endocrine  system,  brain  and  peripheral 
immune  and  inflammatory  responses  [3,5,6,58–60].  This 
review  will  focus  on  a  few  examples  of  microbial  metabo-
lites  affecting  host  mucosal  and  peripheral 
immune 
responses.

Dysbiosis  is  commonly  associated  with  a  shift  towards 
aerobes  and  facultative  anaerobes  and  decreased  levels  of 
SCFAs [4,7,61,62]. SCFAs, acetate, propionate and butyrate, 
were  found  to  bind  G-protein  coupled  receptors  GPR41 
and  43  with  varying  affinity  [63,64].  In  a  landmark  paper, 
we  described  a  diet–microbiota–host  immune  axis  where 
microbial  metabolism  of  dietary  fibre  resulted  in  SCFA 
production,  and  acetate  in  particular  activated  GPR43  on 
innate immune cells, including eosinophils and neutrophils 
[65].  Acetate  ligation  of  GPR43  on  neutrophils  affected 
chemotaxis, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and phagocytic 
activity.  In  the  absence  of  microbiota,  colitis  and  arthritis 
was  exacerbated,  and  this  could  be  rescued  by  addition 
of  acetate  in  the  drinking  water  [65].  Mice  lacking  Gpr43 
also  exhibited  exacerbated  colitis,  arthritis  and  allergic 
airway  responses,  which  could  not  be  rescued  by  addition 
of  acetate  to  the  drinking  water  [65].  Numerous  other 
effects  of  SCFA,  whether  receptor-dependent  or  -inde-
pendent  have  now  been  reported  [66–69].

Antibiotic  treatment-induced  dysbiosis  can  have  wide-
reaching  effects,  for  example  on  inflammation,  infection 
and responses to vaccination [70–72]. Antibiotics have been 
shown to affect SCFA-producing bacteria causing a decrease 
in SCFA abundance [73,74]. In a recent study, macrophage 
dysfunction  was  noted  following  antibiotic-induced  dys-
biosis  causing  aberrant  activation  of  T  helper  type  1  (Th1) 
cells,  leaving  mice  susceptible  to  Th17  and  Th2-type  infec-
tions  [75].  The  authors  demonstrated  that  SCFA  were 
reduced  following  antibiotics,  and  that  supplementing 
butyrate  could  restore  macrophage  hyporesponsiveness  to 
microbial  ligands  and  prevent  Th1  over-activation  [75], 
thus  showing  a  wider  effect  of  antibiotics  on  the  host 

196

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society for 
Immunology, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 197: 193–204

K. M. MaslowskiREVIEW SERIES: TRANSLATING IMMUNOMETABOLISMbeyond  microbial  composition  and  effects  on  colonization 
resistance.  This  observation  is  likely  to  also  be  applicable 
to  conditions  where  SCFA  are  known  to  have  peripheral 
effects  and  also  suggest  that  antibiotic  treatment  would 
affect  other  microbial-derived  metabolites.

Acetate  and  butyrate  have  also  been  found  to  affect 
IgA  responses.  In  two  separate  studies,  acetate  was  found 
to  affect  CD103+  dendritic  cell  retinol  dehydrogenase 
activity  resulting  in  increased  retinoic  acid  (RA)  produc-
tion,  which  increased  intestinal  IgA  production  [66,76]. 
Tan et al. additionally showed enhanced T follicular helper 
cell function supporting mucosal germinal centre reactions 
[66]. This enhanced mucosal IgA production was important 
for  controlling  food  allergy  responses,  with  zero  fibre 
feeding,  or  knock-outs  of  Gpr43  or  Gpr109A  (butyrate 
receptor),  being  more  susceptible  to  food  allergy  [66].

for  maintaining 

Within the mucosal tissue, SCFAs, butyrate in particular, 
immune  homoeostasis 
important 
is 
through  induction  of  regulatory  T  cells  (Tregs)  [77,78]. 
Butyrate-stimulated  Treg  expansion  in  the  lamina  propria 
and bone marrow has been shown to promote interaction 
between  bone  marrow  Tregs  and  CD8  T  cells,  increasing 
production  of  Wnt10b  by  CD8  T  cells,  which  has  effects 
on  stromal  cells  and  osteoclasts  promoting  bone  forma-
tion [79]. Supplementation of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG 
(LGG)  had  previously  been  shown  to  affect  bone  forma-
tion,  but  the  mechanisms  had  not  been  described.  In  this 
study,  they  confirm  that  LGG  increases  bone  mass  via 
increased  circulation  of  butyrate.  Interestingly,  LGG  itself 
is  not  responsible  for  butyrate  production,  but  promotes 
other  bacterial  species  that  produce  butyrate  [79],  again 
highlighting the complex interplay between different micro-
bial  communities  and  how  a  particular  species  may  not 
be  the  key  dominant  factor,  but  rather  that  fulfilment  of 
for  maintaining 
a  metabolic  niche 
homoeostasis.

important 

is 

The  maternal  gut  microbial  composition  and  products, 
particularly  SCFA,  have  been  shown  to  affect  immune 
development  in  offspring  [80,81].  In  one  study,  high-fibre 
feeding  or  supplementation  with  acetate  reduced  suscep-
tibility  to  allergic  airway  disease  (AAD)  in  mice,  and 
furthermore  could  supress  AAD  development  in  the  off-
spring  of  mice  fed  on  a  high-fibre/acetate  diet  during 
pregnancy  [80].  This,  they  showed,  had  an  effect  on  Treg 
expression  of  forkhead  box  protein  3  (FoxP3)  and  block-
ing  Tregs  ablated  the  beneficial  effects  of  acetate  on  AAD 
development  [80].  Nakajima  et  al.  [82]  have  shown  that 
microbial-derived  butyrate  affected  thymic  expression  of 
Aire,  which  is  known  to  be  important  for  Treg  selection 
in  the  thymus.  In  further  studies,  they  demonstrated  that 
maternal  delivery  of  butyrate  increased  thymic  expression 
of  Gpr41  and  Aire  and  increased  thymic  and  peripheral 
Treg  numbers  [81].  This  study  did  not  determine  if  the 

altered  Treg  number  had  any  effect  on  peripheral  immune 
responses  but,  coupled  with  the  other  studies  described 
above,  the  data  would  suggest  that  SCFA  can  affect  Treg 
development  via  a  multitude  of  mechanisms  [77–81].

dendrite 

extension 

While  many  studies  have  found  effects  of  SCFA,  other 
microbial-derived  metabolites  are  also  being  discovered 
to  affect  immune  responses.  Morita  et  al.  [83]  found  that 
GPR31  expression  on  CX3CR1+  intestinal  dendritic  cells 
senses  bacterial-produced  lactate  and  pyruvate  and  medi-
sampling. 
ates 
Supplementation  of  lactate  or  pyruvate  enhanced  uptake 
and immune responses to S. typhimurium infection, which 
was  not  afforded  in  Gpr31–/–  mice.  Engagement  of  lactate 
with its other receptor, Gpr81, on intestinal dendritic cells 
and  macrophages  was  also  shown  to  reduce  colitis  by 
suppressing  cytokine  production  and  Th1/Th17  cell  dif-
ferentiation [84], but whether this was due to gut microbe-
generated  lactate  in  particular  was  not  addressed.

luminal 

and 

Effect of the host immune system on composition of 
the gut microbiota

IgA  plays  a  critical  role  in  controlling  the  composition 
and  diversity  of  the  intestinal  microbiota  [85,86].  The 
importance  of  maintaining  bacterial  composition  by  IgA 
is  highlighted  by  the  fact  that  people  with  selective  IgA 
deficiency  have  a  higher  predisposition  to  autoimmune 
diseases  [9,87].  IgA  not  only  limits  enteric  pathogens 
[88,89],  but  also  actively  promotes  beneficial  microbes. 
For  example,  IgA  coating  enhances  Bacteroides  fragilis 
habitation  of  the  mucous  and  mediates  intimate  interac-
tions  with  the  intestinal  epithelium  [90].

A  recent  study  showed  further  importance  of  IgA  coat-
ing  of  a  strain  of  Bacteroidetes,  which  was  important  for 
modulating  interphylum  bacterial  interactions  and  co-
operation  via  shared  metabolism  [91].  Aiming  to  test 
whether  glycan–glycan  interactions  between  IgA,  bacteria 
and mucous are important for modulating gut microbiota, 
Nakajima  et  al.  [91]  developed  a  highly  glycosylated  anti-
ovalbumin IgA monoclonal antibody. This antibody bound 
preferentially  to  metabolically  active  members  of  the 
Bacteriodales  via  glycan-lipopolysaccharide  (LPS)  interac-
tions.  Binding  of  this  highly  glycosylated,  antigen-inde-
pendent  antibody  altered  microbial  expression  of 
polysaccharide  utilization  loci  (PUL)  genes,  particularly 
in  mucosal-associated  bacteria,  and  not  bacteria  present 
in  the  colonic  content  [91].  Highly  expressed  PUL  genes 
included  components  of  the  starch  utilization  system, 
which  the  authors  propose  act  as  symbiotic  factors  ena-
bling  bacterial  presence  in  the  mucous  environment,  and 
have  provisionally  named  them  as  mucous-associated 
functional  factors  (MAFFs)  [91].  A  complex  interaction 
between  B.  thetaiotaomicron  in  the  mucous,  expression 

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society 
for Immunology, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 197: 193–204

197

Metabolism at the centre of the host–microbe relationshipREVIEW SERIES: TRANSLATING IMMUNOMETABOLISMof  MAFFs  and  presence  of  other  symbiotic  partners  was 
required for the full effect of MAFFs. IgA binding-induced 
expression  of  MAFFs  drove  the  expansion  of  butyrate-
producing Clostridiales and promoted colonic homoeostasis 
protecting  in  a  model  of  colitis  [91].  IgA  has  been  known 
for some time to be important in regulating gut microbial 
composition  [63],  but  this  study  is  the  first  to  describe 
such complex interplay between a host factor (IgA), micro-
bial  selection  in  a  given  niche  and  interphylum  microbial 
interaction,  resulting  in  metabolites  that  benefit  the  host.
IgA has also been suggested to limit microbial metabolite 
penetration, thus impacting on the host response to micro-
bial  metabolites  [92].  Uchimura  et  al.  [92]  colonized 
germ-free mice with a replication-deficient Escherichia coli 
which  had  been  grown  in  12C-labelled  medium,  enabling 
them  to  trace  metabolites  that  originated  from  the  bac-
teria  within  tissues  and  urine.  Because  of  the  transient 
colonization,  they  could  compare  between  mice  that  had 
received  no  prior  colonization  and  those  that  had  and 
therefore  had  IgA  induction.  They  found  that  IgA  pro-
moted  the  clearance  of  metabolites  from  the  host  tissues 
by  accelerating  microbial  clearance  [92].  While  this  study 
was  able  to  show  that  IgA  affects  the  distribution  of 
metabolites  in  this  setting,  which  would  be  in  agreement 
with  other  studies  showing  the  importance  of  IgA  in 
selecting  bacterial  species  and  affecting  the  time  bacteria 
reside  in  the  gut  [85,86,89],  whether  the  same  kind  of 
effects  would  be  applicable  in  the  more  complex  setting 
of a colonized gut is uncertain. For example, several stud-
ies  show  that  IgA  can  increase  the  dwell  time  of  certain 
bacteria,  which  can  have  follow-on  effects  on  the  wider 
microbial  composition  and  metabolite  availability  [90,91]. 
Nevertheless, all these studies demonstrate the importance 
of  IgA  in  the  regulation  of  the  microbiota  composition, 
which thereby affects metabolic activity of the microbiome 
and  metabolites  released  into  the  host  system.

Metabolic interplay between host, microbiota and 
pathogens

Some  of  the  studies  discussed  above  describe  examples 
of  interphylum  co-operation  via  metabolites.  This  section 
expands  on  that  theme  and  will  highlight  some  examples 
of  co-infections  relying  on  metabolic  subversion,  or  uti-
lization of certain metabolites, to aid infection or promote 
host  responses.

A type 2 innate immune circuit between the microbiota, 
intestinal  tuft  cells  and  group  2  innate  lymphoid  cells 
(ILC2s)  has  been  described  by  several  groups  [93–95]. 
Intestinal tuft cells are a population of chemosensory cells 
that  can  be  found  in  the  airways,  trachea  and  intestinal 
tract  [96].  In  the  small  intestine  they  have  been  described 
to  produce  interleukin  (IL)-25  upon  helminth  infection. 

This initiates IL-13 production by ILC2s, which feeds back 
on  epithelial  progenitor  cells  and  biases  their  differentia-
tion  into  goblet  and  tuft  cells,  thus  promoting  a  positive 
feed-forward loop that promotes worm clearance [93–95]. 
Recent  reports  found  that  the  tuft  cell–ILC2  circuit  could 
be  induced  by  microbial-derived  succinate  binding  to 
G-protein  coupled  receptor  91  (GPR91,  also  known  as 
succinate  receptor  1,  SUCNR1)  [97–100].  SUCNR1  is 
specifically  expressed  on  small  intestinal  tuft  cells,  and 
ligation  with  succinate  induces  a  downstream  chemosens-
ing  pathway  involving  α-gustducin  (Gnat3)  and  Trpm5. 
Supplementing  succinate  in  the  drinking  water  was  suf-
ficient  to  activate  SUCNR1  and  induce  the  IL-25–ILC2–
IL-13-driven  expansion  of  goblet  and  tuft  cells.  Succinate 
produced by the protist Tritrichomonas also drove a type-2 
response  through  SUCNR1  signalling.  In  the  context  of 
helminth infection, however, SUCNR1 signalling appeared 
redundant  or  absent,  although  downstream  activation  of 
Trpm5  and  IL-25  occurs  [99,100],  although  one  of  these 
studies  showed  that  activation  of  this  type  2  circuit  by 
Tritrichomonas-derived  succinate  protected  from  subse-
quent  infection  with  helminths  [97].  This  would  suggest 
that  the  expansion  of  goblet  and  tuft  cells  is  important 
for  limiting  infection  with  helminths.  Even  though  hel-
minths may be able to produce succinate during infection, 
helminth-derived  succinate  does  not  induce  SUCNR1 
signalling.  This  may  be  due  to  suppression  of  succinate 
production,  use  of  alternative  pathways  or  perhaps  locali-
zation  of  succinate  production.

Several  studies  have  shown  the  important  effects  of 
aryl  hydrocarbon  receptor  (AHR)  ligands  on  the  gut  epi-
thelium,  maintaining  the  stem  cell  niche,  barrier  function 
and  protection  from  tumorigenesis  and  infection  [101], 
as  well  as  important  effects  on  immune  cells  and  periph-
eral  inflammatory  responses  [102,103].  AHR  ligands  also 
regulate  mucosal  immunity  through  induction  of  IL-22, 
a  cytokine  important  for  epithelial  restitution,  induction 
of  anti-microbial  peptides  and  regulation  of  inflammation 
[104].  Zelante  et  al.  [105]  found  that  tryptophan  metabo-
lism  by  stomach-resident  commensal  Lactobacillus  reuteri 
resulted  in  indole-3-aldehyde  production  (IAld),  which 
they  showed  activated  AHR  signalling  in  NKp46+  cells 
(and  possibly  also  other  cell  types)  which  increased  IL-22 
production by stomach epithelia. This, they demonstrated, 
was  important  for  resistance  against  Candida  albicans 
infection  [105].  Increasing  tryptophan  supply  by  dietary 
supplementation, or deletion of host indolamine 2,3-dioxy-
genase  1  (IDO1),  increased  levels  of  the  tryptophan 
metabolite  IAld  specifically  (due  to  enzymatic  pathways 
present  in  L.  reuteri),  which  mediated  these  effects  [105].
Caspase  recruitment  domain-containing  protein  9 
(CARD9)  is  a  signalling  adaptor  protein  involved  in  inte-
grating signals from a range of innate receptors, including 

198

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society for 
Immunology, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 197: 193–204

K. M. MaslowskiREVIEW SERIES: TRANSLATING IMMUNOMETABOLISMC-type 
lectin  and  nucleotide-binding  oligomerization 
domain-like  (NOD)  receptors,  and  is  thus  involved  in 
bacterial, viral and fungal immune responses [106]. CARD9 
deficiency  was  found  to  affect  gut  microbial  composition 
and had a resultant effect on tryptophan metabolism [107]. 
Reductions  in  certain  bacterial  populations,  including  L. 
reuteri  and  Allobaculum  sp.,  was  associated  with  dimin-
ished  indole-3-acetic  acid  (IAA)  production  in  the  colon 
[107].  Accordingly,  faeces  from  CARD9–/–  mice  had 
reduced  ability  to  activate  an  AHR  reporter,  indicating 
the  potential  of  microbial-derived  IAA  to  signal  through 
AHR.  CARD9–/–  mice  were  more  susceptible  to  colitis, 
in  concordance  with  CARD9  being  a  risk  allele  for  IBD 
in  humans.  Adding  an  AHR  agonist  rescued  IL-22  and 
adenosine  monophosphate  (AMP)  production  and  pro-
tected from colitis in CARD9–/–, again showing the impor-
tance  of  AHR  ligands  in  promoting  IL-22  production 
and  epithelial  barrier  function.  Furthermore,  IL-22  itself 
reducing 
alters  microbial 
Lactobacillus  sp.  [107,108],  probably  through  the  produc-
tion of AMPs, and thereby affects tryptophan metabolism, 
forming  a  cyclical  relationship  between  microbial  trypto-
phan  metabolism,  AHR  agonism,  IL-22  production  and 
modulation  of  the  intestinal  epithelium  [107].

composition,  particularly 

IL-22  production  is  increased  upon  enteric  infection 
and 
is  protective  against  some  pathogens,  such  as 
Citrobacter  rodentium,  and  colitis,  as  discussed  above  and 
elsewhere  [107,109–111].  However,  IL-22  can  promote 
colonization  by  other  pathogens  such  as  S.  typhimurium 
by controlling growth of its niche competitor E. coli [112]. 
In  a  study  by  Grizotte-Lake  et  al.  [113]  they  found  that 
commensal  microbes  suppress  small  intestinal  epithelial 
expression  of  Rdh7,  an  enzyme  required  for  retinoic  acid 
(RA)  production,  resulting  in  reduced  RA  in  SPF  mice 
compared to germ-free mice. This effect was due to spore-
forming  Clostridia  sp.  The  reduction  in  RA  in  SPF  mice 
resulted  in  diminished  IL-22  production  by  ILC3s  and 
other  T  cell  populations.  To  understand  the  effects  of 
Rdh7,  they  used  Rdh7–/–  mice  and  could  recapitulate  the 
reduction  in  RA  and  IL-22.  This  resulted  in  decreased 
production  of  AMPs  by  the  small  intestinal  epithelium 
which  led  to  alterations  in  the  gut  microbiota,  and  pro-
moted  host  resistance  to  S.  typhimurium  infection  (there 
was  no  effect  on  C.  rodentium  infection).  Along  with  the 
studies  described  above  [107,108],  this  suggests  that  a 
degree  of  tonic  regulation  of  IL-22  mediated  by  the  gut 
microbiota  is  important  for  modulating  gut  microbial 
composition and also susceptibility to intestinal pathogens. 
This highlights how these networks need to be finely tuned 
in  order  to  promote  homoeostatic  interactions  between 
host  and  commensals  while  limiting  pathogens.

Pathogens  can  alter  the  gastrointestinal  environment 
to  enable  them  to  thrive.  Salmonella  spp.  virulence 

factors induce inflammation in the mucosa characterized 
by  neutrophil  recruitment.  Neutrophils,  and  the  inflam-
mation  induced,  release  a  large  amount  of  electron 
acceptors,  such  as  tetrathionate  and  nitrate,  which  fuel 
Salmonella  metabolism,  allowing  their  expansion  while 
altering  the  gut  microbial  composition,  including  the 
depletion  of  Clostridia  spp.  [114,115].  This  causes  a 
reduction  in  butyrate  which  alters  metabolic  activity  of 
enterocytes  which  usually  rely  on  butyrate,  as  discussed 
above,  and  thus  leads  to  increased  oxygen  availability, 
further  supporting  Salmonella  growth  [7].  Changes  in 
enterocyte  metabolism  were  found  to  generate  lactate 
which,  along  with  the  increase  in  oxygen,  Salmonella 
could  use  as  an  energy  source  with  oxygen  as  the  final 
electron  acceptor  [70].  Furthermore,  it  was  recently 
reported  that  Salmonella  can  utilize  microbiota-derived 
succinate  and  host-derived  electron  acceptors  to  enable 
a complete oxidative tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle [116]. 
Thus,  pathogens  such  as  Salmonella  spp.  can  actively 
induce  dysbiosis,  or  dysbiosis  through  other  causes  can 
support  the  growth  of  Salmonella.

More  complex  interactions  between  host  and  microbial 
species  can  occur  in  co-infection  settings.  Chronic  hel-
minth  infections  are  associated  with  increased  occurrence 
of  co-infections  with  a  range  of  bacterial  and  viral  patho-
gens  [117–120].  Induction  of  type  2  (Th2)  immune 
responses  and  Tregs  is  thought  to  play  a  major  role  in 
limiting  protective  Th1  and  Th17  responses  required  to 
clear  bacterial  and  viral  pathogens  [118–121].  Helminth 
infections  can  alter  the  microbial  composition  and  have 
been  shown  to  increase  SCFA  production,  which  can 
alleviate allergic airway inflammation and colitis [122,123]. 
Using  a  co-infection  model,  Reynolds  et  al.  [124]  found 
that  helminth 
infection  (Heligmosomoides  polygyrus) 
altered  the  metabolome  of  small  intestinal  epithelial  cells, 
which  has  a  resultant  effect  on  Salmonella  expression  of 
invasion genes within the Salmonella pathogenicity island-1 
(SPI-1).  Metabolites  extracted  from  naive  small  intestinal 
epithelial  cells  could  supress  SPI-1  expression  and  reduce 
invasion of Salmonella in an in-vitro invasion assay, whereas 
helminth-infected  epithelial  metabolites  could  not,  and 
thus  increased  Salmonella  invasion  was  observed  if  mice 
were  already  infected  with  helminths  [124].  This  study 
did not identify individual metabolites that exert this effect, 
so  whether  individual  or  multiple  metabolites  are  respon-
sible  is  yet  to  be  determined.  Given  that  helminths,  or 
helminth-derived  products,  are  of  interest  as  therapeutic 
interventions  for  allergic  airway  and  inflammatory  bowel 
disease,  it  is  important  to  understand  possible  negative 
impacts  they  may  have  in  promoting  co-infections  [124].
Altogether,  these  studies  highlight  the  complex  interac-
tions between host and microbes, as well as intermicrobial 
interactions,  many  of  which  are  mediated  by,  or  involve 

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society 
for Immunology, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 197: 193–204

199

Metabolism at the centre of the host–microbe relationshipREVIEW SERIES: TRANSLATING IMMUNOMETABOLISMsubversion  of,  metabolic  pathways  and  metabolites. 
Epithelial metabolism and physiological hypoxia are central 
to  the  host–microbe  relationship.  As  colonocytes  are  dif-
ferentiated  at  the  top  of  the  crypts  they  express  PPARγ, 
which  switches  on  β-oxidation  of  butyrate  and  oxidative 
phosphorylation  which  consumes  oxygen.  By  the  induc-
tion  of  physiological  hypoxia,  HIF  becomes  stabilized  and 
then  induces  transcription  of  essential  genes  required  for 
epithelial  barrier  function,  such  as  tight  junction  proteins, 
anti-microbial  peptides  and  mucous  production.  The 
hypoxic  environment  created  then  favours  obligate  anaer-
obes  which  act  in  a  mutualistic  relationship,  providing 
the  main  energy  source,  butyrate,  for  the  colonocytes  by 
fermentation  of  dietary  fibre  (Fig.  1).  This  establishes 
obligate  anaerobes  as  the  dominant  bacteria  within  the 
colon, and further metabolites derived from the microbiota, 
such  as  acetate,  lactate,  AHR  ligands,  indole-derived  mol-
ecules,  etc.  are  now  appreciated  to  exert  a  broad  range 
of effects on immune and host function, as well as feeding 
back  to  select  the  microbiome  further  via  IgA  or  anti-
microbial peptides. These processes, from epithelial metab-
olism  to  maintenance  of  obligate  anaerobes,  are  disrupted 
during  infections,  even  purposefully,  favouring  facultative 
anaerobes  or  aerobes,  which  can  have  deleterious  effects 
on  the  host.

Future  considerations  in  this  area  would  be  to  under-
stand more clearly the development of epithelial metabolic 
pathways, understand any differences between small intes-
tine  and  the  colon  and  how  fluctuations  in  oxygen  could 
be  affecting  the  microbiome  and  therefore  host  function. 
As  discussed  above,  constant  feeding  leading  to  increased 
blood  flow  and  oxygenation  in  the  intestinal  tract  could 
be  deleterious  and  one  way  by  which  a  western  lifestyle 
may  be  causing  dysbiosis  and  increased  susceptibility  to 
inflammatory  diseases.  It  is  also  of  interest  that  chronic 
bowel inflammation, such as in Crohn’s disease or ulcera-
tive  colitis,  causes  increased  angiogenesis  in  the  intestinal 
tract,  and  thus  increased  oxygen  availability  might  be  one 
reason  for  poor  treatment  outcomes  in  many  patients, 
where dysbiosis and ongoing inflammation are concomitant 
factors  [125].  In  addition  to  increased  angiogenesis,  intes-
tinal  inflammation  is  also  associated  with  bleeding  in  to 
the  gut  lumen,  which  also  delivers  increased  haem-bound 
oxygen.  As  such,  targeting  oxygen  has  been  proposed  as 
a  treatment  option  for  inflammatory  bowel  diseases  [8].
Some  obligate  anaerobic  commensals  cope  with  oxygen 
by  employing  mechanisms  such  as  extracellular  electron 
shuttles,  which  add  electrons  to  oxygen.  This  relies  upon 
flavins  and  thiols  being  present  in  the  gut;  however,  dur-
ing  inflammation  thiols  become  depleted  [8,126].  Faecal 
microbiota  transplant  has  been  employed  successfully  for 
C. difficile-infected patients, and is entering use for further 
conditions  from  inflammatory  bowel  disease  to  asthma 

and  cancer  treatment.  However,  defining  ‘good’  faecal 
donors  is  a  challenge,  and  presence  of  microbial  species 
that  are  good  colonizers  and  have  traits  such  as  being 
able  to  utilize  and  deplete  oxygen  may  be  an  important 
consideration.

In  summary,  metabolism  and  metabolites  are  the  basis 
of  host–microbe  interactions.  Further  understanding  of 
these  metabolic  interactions  will  be  important  for  devel-
oping treatment strategies for inflammatory bowel diseases 
as  well  as  the  wide  range  of  other  diseases  associated 
with  dysbiosis.

Acknowledgements

K.  M.  M.  is  a  Birmingham  Fellow  and  is  supported  by 
the Wellcome Trust [214087/Z/18/Z] and Cancer Research 
UK  [C61638/A27112].

Disclosures

The  author  declares  no  conflict  of  interest.

References

1  O’Hara  AM,  Shanahan  F.  The  gut  flora  as  a  forgotten  organ. 

EMBO  Rep  2006;  7:688–93.

2  Engel P,  Moran NA.  The gut microbiota of  insects –  diversity 

in  structure  and 

function.  FEMS  Microbiol  Rev  2013; 

37:699–735.

3  Maslowski KM, MacKay CR. Diet, gut microbiota and immune 

responses.  Nat  Immunol  2011;  12:5–9.

4  Li  X,  Watanabe  K,  Gut  Kimura  I.  Microbiota  dysbiosis  drives 

and  implies  novel  therapeutic  strategies  for  diabetes  mellitus 

and related metabolic diseases. Front Immunol Frontiers Media 

SA  2017;  8:1882.

5  Scriven  M,  Dinan  TG,  Cryan  JF,  Wall  M.  Neuropsychiatric 

disorders: influence of gut microbe to brain signalling. Diseases 

(Basel)  2018;  6:78.

6  Valles-Colomer  M,  Falony  G,  Darzi  Y  et  al.  The  neuroactive 

potential  of  the  human  gut  microbiota  in  quality  of  life  and 

depression.  Nat  Microbiol  2019;  4:623–32.

7  Litvak  Y,  Byndloss  MX,  Bäumler  AJ.  Colonocyte  metabolism 

shapes  the  gut  microbiota.  Science  2018;  362:eaat9076.

8  Rigottier-Gois  L.  Dysbiosis  in  inflammatory  bowel  diseases: 

the  oxygen  hypothesis  microbe–microbe  and  microbe–host 

interactions.  ISME  J  2013;  7:1256–61.

9  Vogelzang  A,  Guerrini  MM,  Minato  N,  Fagarasan  S. 

Microbiota  –  an  amplifier  of  autoimmunity.  Curr  Opin 

Immunol  2018;  55:15–21.

  10  Gordon  HA,  Pesti  L.  The  gnotobiotic  animal  as  a  tool  in  the 

study  of  host  microbial  relationships.  Bacteriol  Rev  1971; 

35:390.

  11  Wostmann  BS.  The  germfree  animal  in  nutritional  studies. 

Ann  RevNutr  1981;  1:257–279.

200

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society for 
Immunology, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 197: 193–204

K. M. MaslowskiREVIEW SERIES: TRANSLATING IMMUNOMETABOLISM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  12  Backhed  F,  Ding  H,  Wang  T  et  al.  The  gut  microbiota  as 

through oxygen competition. Cell Host Microbe 2019; 25:128–

an  environmental  factor  that  regulates  fat  storage.  Proc  Natl 

39.e5.

Acad  Sci  USA  2004;  101:15718–23.

  29  Lefebvre M, Paulweber B, Fajas L et al. Peroxisome proliferator-

  13  Turnbaugh  PJ,  Bäckhed  F,  Fulton  L,  Gordon  JI.  Diet-induced 

activated  receptor  gamma  is  induced  during  differentiation 

obesity  is  linked  to  marked  but  reversible  alterations  in  the 

of  colon  epithelium  cells.  J  Endocrinol  1999;  162:331–40.

mouse  distal  gut  microbiome.  Cell  Host  Microbe  2008; 

  30  Espey  MG.  Role  of  oxygen  gradients  in  shaping  redox 

3:213–23.

relationships  between  the  human  intestine  and  its  microbiota. 

  14  Turnbaugh PJ, Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, Knight R, Gordon 

Free  Rad  Biol  Med  2013;  55:130–40.

JI.  The  effect  of  diet  on  the  human  gut  microbiome:  a 

  31  Albenberg L, Esipova TV, Judge CP et al. Correlation between 

metagenomic  analysis  in  humanized  gnotobiotic  mice.  Sci 

intraluminal  oxygen  gradient  and  radial  partitioning  of 

Transl  Med  2009;  1:6ra14.

intestinal  microbiota.  Gastroenterology  2014;147:1055–63.e8.

  15  Turnbaugh  PJ,  Ley  RE,  Mahowald  MA,  Magrini  V,  Mardis 

  32  Zheng L, Kelly CJ, Colgan SP. Physiologic hypoxia and oxygen 

ER,  Gordon  JI.  An  obesity-associated  gut  microbiome  with 

homeostasis  in  the  healthy  intestine.  A  review  in  the  theme: 

increased 

capacity 

for 

energy  harvest.  Nature  2006; 

cellular responses to hypoxia. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2015; 

444:1027–31.

309:C350–60.

  16  Turnbaugh  PJ,  Hamady  M,  Yatsunenko  T  et  al.  A  core  gut 

  33  Wächtershäuser  A,  Loitsch  SM,  Stein  J.  PPAR-γ  Is  selectively 

microbiome 

in  obese  and 

lean 

twins.  Nature  2009; 

upregulated  in  caco-2  cells  by  butyrate.  Biochem  Biophys  Res 

457:480–4.

Commun  2000;  272:380–5.

  17  Donohoe  DR,  Garge  N,  Zhang  X  et  al.  The  microbiome  and 

34  Glover  LE,  Colgan  SP.  Epithelial  barrier  regulation  by  hypoxia-

butyrate  regulate  energy  metabolism  and  autophagy  in  the 

inducible  factor.  Ann  Am  Thorac  Soc  2017;  14(Suppl  3);S233–6.

mammalian  colon.  Cell  Metab  2011;  13:517–26.

  35  Zheng L, Kelly CJ, Colgan SP. Physiologic hypoxia and oxygen 

  18  Roediger  WE.  Utilization  of  nutrients  by  isolated  epithelial 

homeostasis  in  the  healthy  intestine.  A  review  in  the  theme: 

cells  of  the  rat  colon.  Gastroenterology  1982;  83:424–9.

cellular responses to hypoxia. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2015; 

  19  Salleh  M,  Ardawi  M,  Newsholme  EA.  Fuel  utilization  in 

309:C350–60.

colonocytes  of  the  rat.  Biochem  J  1985;  231:713–19.

  36  Dashwood  RH,  Myzak  MC,  Ho  E.  Dietary  HDAC  inhibitors: 

  20  Roediger  WE.  Role  of  anaerobic  bacteria  in  the  metabolic 

time  to  rethink  weak  ligands  in  cancer  chemoprevention? 

welfare  of 

the  colonic  mucosa 

in  man.  Gut  1980; 

Carcinogenesis  2006;  27:344–9.

21:793–98.

  37  Wells  JM,  Mercenier  A.  Mucosal  delivery  of  therapeutic  and 

  21  Kelly  CJ,  Zheng  L,  Campbell  EL  et  al.  Crosstalk  between 

prophylactic  molecules  using  lactic  acid  bacteria.  Nat  Rev 

microbiota-derived  short-chain  fatty  acids  and 

intestinal 

Microbiol  2008;  6:349–62.

epithelial  HIF  augments  tissue  barrier  function.  Cell  Host 

  38  Gill  HS,  Rutherfurd  KJ,  Prasad  J,  Gopal  PK.  Enhancement 

Microbe  2015;  17:662–71.

of  natural and acquired immunity by Lactobacillus  rhamnosus 

  22  Schaedler  RW,  Dubos  R,  Costello  R.  The  development  of  the 

(HN001), 

Lactobacillus 

acidophilus 

(HN017) 

and 

bacterial  flora  in  the  gastrointestinal  tract  of  mice.  J  Exp  Med 

Bifidobacterium  lactis  (HN019).  Br  J  Nutr  2000;  83:167–76.

1965;  122:59–66.

  39  Perdigon  G,  Alvarez  S,  Rachid  M,  Agüero  G,  Gobbato  N. 

  23  McAllisterv  JS,  Savage  DC.  Microbial  colonization  of  the 

Immune  system  stimulation  by  probiotics.  J  Dairy  Sci  1995; 

intestinal  epithelium  in  suckling  mice.  Infect  Immun  1973; 

78:1597–606.

7:666–72.

  40  Watanabe T, Nishio H, Tanigawa T et al. Probiotic Lactobacillus 

  24  Gillilland  MG,  Erb-Downward  JR,  Bassis  CM  et  al.  Ecological 

casei  strain  Shirota  prevents  indomethacin-induced  small 

succession of bacterial communities during conventionalization 

intestinal  injury:  involvement  of  lactic  acid.  Am  J  Physiol 

of 

germ-free  mice.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol 

2012; 

Liver  Physiol  2009;  297:G506–13.

78:2359–66.

  41  Lee  Y-S,  Kim  T-Y,  Kim  Y  et  al.  Lactate  accelerates  intestinal 

  25  Savage DC. Factors involved in colonization of the gut epithelial 

stem-cell-mediated  epithelial  development  in  brief.  Cell  Host 

surface.  Am  J  Clin  Nutr  1978;  31:S131–5.

Microbe  2018;  24:833–46.

  26  Furuta  GT,  Turner  JR,  Taylor  CT  et  al.  Hypoxia-inducible 

  42  Cai  T-Q,  Ren  N,  Jin  L  et  al.  Role  of  GPR81  in  lactate-

factor 1–dependent induction of intestinal trefoil factor protects 

mediated reduction of adipose lipolysis. Biochem Biophys Res 

barrier 

function  during  Hypoxia. 

J  Exp  Med  2001; 

Commun  2008;  377:987–91.

193:1027–34.

  43  Ge  H,  Weiszmann  J,  Reagan  JD  et  al.  Elucidation  of  signaling 

  27  Byndloss  MX,  Olsan  EE,  Rivera-Chávez  F  et  al.  Microbiota-

and  functional  activities  of  an  orphan  GPCR,  GPR81.  J  Lipid 

activated 

PPAR-γ 

signaling 

inhibits 

dysbiotic 

Res  2008;  49:797–803.

Enterobacteriaceae  expansion.  Science  2017;  357:570–5.

  44  Liu  C,  Wu  J,  Zhu  J  et  al.  Lactate  inhibits  lipolysis  in  fat 

  28  Litvak  Y,  Mon  KKZ,  Nguyen  H  et  al.  Commensal 

cells  through  activation  of  an  orphan  g-protein-coupled 

enterobacteriaceae  protect  against  Salmonella  colonization 

receptor,  GPR81.  J  Biol  Chem  2009;  284:2811–22.

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society 
for Immunology, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 197: 193–204

201

Metabolism at the centre of the host–microbe relationshipREVIEW SERIES: TRANSLATING IMMUNOMETABOLISM 
  45  Sato  T,  van  Es  JH,  Snippert  HJ  et  al.  Paneth  cells  constitute 

serum-free  fatty  acids  in  systemic  lupus  erythematosus.  Front 

the niche for Lgr5 stem cells in intestinal crypts. Nature 2011; 

Immunol  2017;  8:23.

469:415–18.

  62  Treem  WR,  Ahsan  N,  Shoup  M,  Hyams  JS.  Fecal  short-chain 

  46  Gregorieff  A,  Pinto  D,  Begthel  H,  Destrée  O,  Kielman  M, 

fatty  acids  in  children  with  inflammatory  bowel  disease.  J 

Clevers  H.  Expression  pattern  of  Wnt  signaling  components 

Pediatr  Gastroenterol  Nutr  1994;  18:159–64.

in  the  adult  intestine.  Gastroenterology  2005;  129:626–38.

  63  Brown  AJ,  Goldsworthy  SM,  Barnes  AA  et  al.  The  Orphan 

  47  Valenta T, Degirmenci B, Moor AE et al. Wnt ligands secreted 

G  protein-coupled  receptors  GPR41  and  GPR43  are  activated 

by  subepithelial  mesenchymal  cells  are  essential  for  the  sur-

by  propionate  and  other  short  chain  carboxylic  acids.  J  Biol 

vival  of  intestinal  stem  cells  and  gut  homeostasis.  Cell  Rep 

Chem  2003;  278:11312–9.

2016;  15:911–18.

  64  Le Poul E, Loison C, Struyf S et al. Functional characterization 

  48  Mardinoglu A, Shoaie S, Bergentall M et al. The gut microbiota 

of  human  receptors  for  short  chain  fatty  acids  and  their  role 

modulates  host  amino  acid  and  glutathione  metabolism  in 

in  polymorphonuclear  cell  activation.  J  Biol  Chem  2003; 

mice.  Mol  Syst  Biol  2015;  11:834–34.

278:25481–9.

  49  Lin  R,  Liu  W,  Piao  M,  Zhu  H.  A  review  of  the  relationship 

  65  Maslowski  KM,  Vieira  AT,  Ng  A  et  al.  Regulation  of 

between the gut microbiota and amino acid metabolism. Amino 

inflammatory responses by gut microbiota and chemoattractant 

Acids  2017;  49:2083–90.

receptor  GPR43.  Nature  2009;  461:1282–6.

  50  Neis  EPJG,  Dejong  CHC,  Rensen  SS.  The  role  of  microbial 

66  Tan  J,  McKenzie  C,  Vuillermin  PJ  et  al.  Dietary  fiber  and  bac-

amino  acid  metabolism  in  host  metabolism.  Nutrients  2015; 

terial SCFA enhance oral tolerance and protect against food allergy 

7:2930–46.

through  diverse  cellular  pathways.  Cell  Rep  2016;  15:2809–24.

  51  Palego  L,  Betti  L,  Rossi  A,  Giannaccini  G.  Tryptophan 

  67  Macia  L,  Tan  J,  Vieira  AT  et  al.  Metabolite-sensing  receptors 

biochemistry:  structural,  nutritional,  metabolic,  and  medical 

GPR43  and  GPR109A  facilitate  dietary  fibre-induced  gut 

aspects  in  humans.  J  Amino  Acids  2016;  2016:8952520.

homeostasis  through  regulation  of  the  inflammasome.  Nat 

  52  Dodd  D,  Spitzer  MH,  Van  Treuren  W  et  al.  A  gut  bacterial 

Commun  2015;  6:6734.

pathway metabolizes aromatic amino acids into nine circulating 

  68  Vieira  AT,  Macia  L,  Galvao  I  et  al.  A  role  for  gut  microbiota 

metabolites.  Nature  2017;  551:648–52.

and the metabolite-sensing receptor GPR43 in a murine model 

  53  Wikoff  WR,  Anfora  AT,  Liu  J  et  al.  Metabolomics  analysis 

of  gout.  Arthritis  Rheumatol  2015;  67:1646–56.

reveals  large  effects  of  gut  microflora  on  mammalian  blood 

  69  Trompette  A,  Gollwitzer  ES,  Yadava  K  et  al.  Gut  microbiota 

metabolites.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  2009;  106:3698–703.

metabolism  of  dietary  fiber  influences  allergic  airway  disease 

  54  Roager  HM,  Licht  TR.  Microbial  tryptophan  catabolites  in 

and  hematopoiesis.  Nat  Med  2014;  20:159–66.

health  and  disease.  Nat  Commun  2018;  9:3294.

  70  Gillis CC, Hughes ER, Spiga L et al. Change in host metabolism 

  55  Venkatesh  M,  Mukherjee  S,  Wang  H  et  al.  Article  symbiotic 

generates  lactate  to  support  salmonella  growth.  Cell  Host 

bacterial  metabolites  regulate  gastrointestinal  barrier  function 

Microbe  2018;  23:54–64.e6.

via  the  xenobiotic  sensor  PXR  and  Toll-like  receptor  4. 

  71  Lynn MA, Tumes DJ, Choo JM et al. Antibiotic-driven dysbiosis 

Immunity  2014;  41:296–310.

leads  to  dysregulated  vaccine  immune  responses  in  mice.  Cell 

  56  Bhattarai  Y,  Williams  BB,  Battaglioli  EJ  et  al.  Microbiota-

Host  Microbe  2018;  23:  653–60.e5.

produced  tryptamine  activates  an  epithelial  g-protein-coupled 

  72  Lazar  V,  Ditu  L-M,  Pircalabioru  GG  et  al.  Aspects  of  gut 

receptor to increase colonic secretion. Cell Host Microbe 2018; 

microbiota  and  immune  system  interactions  in  infectious 

23:775–85.e5.

diseases, immunopathology, and cancer. Front Immunol 2018; 

  57  Sung J, Kim S, Cabatbat JJT et al. Global metabolic interaction 

9:1830.

network  of  the  human  gut  microbiota  for  context-specific 

  73  Romick-Rosendale  LE,  Haslam  DB,  Lane  A  et  al.  Antibiotic 

community-scale  analysis.  Nat  Commun  2017;  8:15393.

exposure  and  reduced  short  chain  fatty  acid  production  after 

  58  Rojo  D,  Hevia  A,  Bargiela  R  et  al.  Ranking  the  impact  of 

hematopoietic  stem  cell  transplant.  Biol  Blood  Marrow 

human  health  disorders  on  gut  metabolism:  systemic  lupus 

Transplant  2018;  24:2418–24.

erythematosus and obesity as study cases. Sci Rep 2015; 5:8310.

  74  Clausen  MR,  Bonnén  H,  Tvede  M,  Brøbech  Mortensen  P. 

  59  De  Vadder  F,  Kovatcheva-Datchary  P,  Zitoun  C,  Duchampt 

Colonic  fermentation  to  short-chain  fatty  acids  is  decreased 

A,  Bäckhed  F,  Mithieux  G.  Microbiota-produced  succinate 

in  antibiotic-associated  diarrhea.  Gastroenterology  1991; 

improves  glucose  homeostasis  via  intestinal  gluconeogenesis. 

101:1497–504.

Cell  Metab  2016;  24:151–7.

  75  Scott  NA,  Andrusaite  A,  Andersen  P  et  al.  Antibiotics  induce 

  60  Kranich  J,  Maslowski  KM,  Mackay  CR.  Commensal  flora  and 

sustained  dysregulation  of  intestinal  T  cell  immunity  by 

the  regulation  of  inflammatory  and  autoimmune  responses. 

perturbing  macrophage  homeostasis.  Sci  Transl  Med 

Semin  Immunol  2011;  23:139–45.

2018;10:eaao4755.

  61  Rodríguez-Carrio J, López P, Sánchez B et al. Intestinal dysbiosis 

  76  Wu  W,  Sun  M,  Chen  F  et  al.  Microbiota  metabolite  short-

is  associated  with  altered  short-chain 

fatty  acids  and 

chain  fatty  acid  acetate  promotes  intestinal  IgA  response  to 

202

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society for 
Immunology, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 197: 193–204

K. M. MaslowskiREVIEW SERIES: TRANSLATING IMMUNOMETABOLISM 
microbiota  which  is  mediated  by  GPR43.  Mucosal  Immunol 

  93  Gerbe  F,  Sidot  E,  Smyth  DJ  et  al.  Intestinal  epithelial  tuft 

2017;  10:946–56.

cells  initiate  type  2  mucosal  immunity  to  helminth  parasites. 

  77  Furusawa  Y,  Obata  Y,  Fukuda  S  et  al.  Commensal  microbe-

Nature  2016;  529:226–30.

derived  butyrate 

induces 

the  differentiation  of  colonic 

  94  Howitt  MR,  Lavoie  S,  Michaud  M  et  al.  Tuft  cells,  taste-

regulatory  T  cells.  Nature  2013;  504:446–50.

chemosensory  cells,  orchestrate  parasite  type  2  immunity  in 

  78  Smith  PM,  Howitt  MR,  Panikov  N  et  al.  The  microbial 

the  gut.  Science  2016;  351:1329–33.

metabolites,  short-chain  fatty  acids,  regulate  colonic  Treg  cell 

  95  von Moltke J, Ji M, Liang H-E, Locksley RM. Tuft-cell-derived 

homeostasis.  Science  2013;  341:569–73.

IL-25  regulates  an  intestinal  ILC2–epithelial  response  circuit. 

  79  Tyagi  AM,  Yu  M,  Darby  TM  et  al.  The  microbial  metabolite 

Nature  2016;  529:221–5.

butyrate  stimulates  bone  formation  via  T  regulatory  cell-

  96  Sato  A.  Tuft  cells.  Anat  Sci  Int  2007;  82:187–99.

mediated  regulation  of  WNT10B  expression.  Immunity  2018; 

  97  Schneider  C,  O’Leary  CE,  von  Moltke  J  et  al.  Metabolite-

49:1116–31.e7.

triggered 

tuft  cell-ILC2  circuit  drives 

small 

intestinal 

  80  Thorburn  AN,  McKenzie  CI,  Shen  S  et  al.  Evidence  that 

remodeling.  Cell  2018;  174:271–84.e14.

asthma is a developmental origin disease influenced by mater-

  98  Hayakawa  Y,  Wang  TC.  The  tuft  cell-ILC2  circuit  integrates 

nal  diet  and  bacterial  metabolites.  Nat  Commun  2015;  

intestinal  defense  and  homeostasis.  Cell  2018;  174:251–3.

6:7320.

  99  Nadjsombati  MS,  McGinty  JW,  Lyons-Cohen  MR  et  al. 

  81  Nakajima  A,  Kaga  N,  Nakanishi  Y  et  al.  Maternal  high  fiber 

Detection  of  succinate  by  intestinal  tuft  cells  triggers  a  type 

diet  during  pregnancy  and  lactation  influences  regulatory  T 

2  innate  immune  circuit.  Immunity  2018;  49:33–41.e7.

cell  differentiation  in  offspring  in  mice.  J  Immunol  2017; 

  100  Lei  W,  Ren  W,  Ohmoto  M  et  al.  Activation  of  intestinal  tuft 

199:3516–24.

cell-expressed  Sucnr1  triggers  type  2  immunity  in  the  mouse 

  82  Nakajima  A,  Negishi  N,  Tsurui  H  et  al.  Commensal  bacteria 

small  intestine.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  2018;  115:5552–7.

regulate  thymic  Aire  expression.  PLOS  ONE  2014;  9:e105904.

  101  Metidji  A,  Omenetti  S,  Crotta  S  et  al.  The  environmental 

  83  Morita  N,  Umemoto  E,  Fujita  S  et  al.  GPR31-dependent 

sensor  AHR  protects 

from 

inflammatory  damage  by 

dendrite protrusion of intestinal CX3CR83 + cells by bacterial 

maintaining  intestinal  stem  cell  homeostasis  and  barrier 

metabolites.  Nature  2019;  566:110–14.

integrity.  Immunity  2018;  49:353–62.e5.

  84  Ranganathan  P,  Shanmugam  A,  Swafford  D  et  al.  GPR81,  a 

  102  Rothhammer  V,  Mascanfroni  ID,  Bunse  L  et  al.  Type  I 

cell-surface receptor for lactate, regulates intestinal homeostasis 

interferons and microbial metabolites of tryptophan modulate 

and  protects  mice  from  experimental  colitis.  J  Immunol  2018; 

astrocyte  activity  and  central  nervous  system  inflammation 

200:1781–9.

via 

the  aryl  hydrocarbon 

receptor.  Nat  Med  2016; 

  85  Fagarasan  S,  Muramatsu  M,  Suzuki  K,  Nagaoka  H,  Hiai  H, 

22:586–97.

Honjo T. Critical roles of activation-induced cytidine deaminase 

  103  Gutiérrez-Vázquez C, Quintana FJ. Regulation of the immune 

in  the  homeostasis  of  gut  flora.  Science  2002;  298:1424–7.

response  by  the  aryl  hydrocarbon  receptor.  Immunity  2018; 

  86  Fadlallah  J,  El  Kafsi  H,  Sterlin  D  et  al.  Microbial  ecology 

48:19–33.

perturbation  in  human  IgA  deficiency.  Sci  Transl  Med  2018; 

  104  Sonnenberg GF, Fouser LA, Artis D. Border patrol: regulation 

10:eaan1217.

of  immunity,  inflammation  and  tissue  homeostasis  at  barrier 

  87  Wang  N,  Shen  N,  Vyse  TJ  et  al.  Selective  IgA  deficiency  in 

surfaces  by  IL-22.  Nat  Immunol  2011;  12:383–90.

autoimmune  diseases.  Mol  Med  2011;  17:1383–96.

  105  Zelante  T,  Iannitti  RG,  Cunha  C  et  al.  Article  tryptophan 

  88  Mantis  NJ,  Rol  N,  Corthésy  B.  Secretory  IgA’s  complex  roles 

catabolites  from  microbiota  engage  aryl  hydrocarbon  receptor 

in  immunity  and  mucosal  homeostasis  in  the  gut.  Mucosal 

and  balance  mucosal  reactivity  via  interleukin-22.  Immunity 

Immunol  2011;  4:603–11.

2013;  39:372–85.

  89  Moor  K,  Diard  M,  Sellin  ME  et  al.  High-avidity  IgA  protects 

  106  Drummond  RA,  Franco  LM,  Lionakis  MS.  Human  CARD9: 

the  intestine  by  enchaining  growing  bacteria.  Nature  2017; 

A  Critical  Molecule  of  Fungal  Immune  Surveillance.  Front 

544:498–502.

Immunol  2018;  9:1836.

  90  Donaldson  GP,  Ladinsky  MS,  Yu  KB  et  al.  Microbiota  utilize 

  107  Lamas B, Richard ML, Leducq V et al. CARD9 impacts colitis 

immunoglobulin  A  for  mucosal  colonization.  Science  2018; 

by  altering  gut  microbiota  metabolism  of  tryptophan  into 

360:795–800.

aryl  hydrocarbon 

receptor 

ligands.  Nat  Med  2016; 

  91  Nakajima  A,  Vogelzang  A,  Maruya  M  et  al.  IgA  regulates 

22:598–605.

the  composition  and  metabolic  function  of  gut  microbiota 

  108  Zenewicz  LA,  Yin  X,  Wang  G  et  al.  IL-22  deficiency  alters 

by  promoting  symbiosis  between  bacteria.  J  Exp  Med  2018; 

colonic  microbiota  to  be  transmissible  and  colitogenic.  J 

215:2019–34.

Immunol  2013;  190:5306–12.

  92  Uchimura  Y,  Fuhrer  T,  Li  H  et  al.  Antibodies  set  boundaries 

  109  Zheng  Y,  Valdez  PA,  Danilenko  DM  et  al.  Interleukin-22 

limiting  microbial  metabolite  penetration  and  the  resultant 

mediates  early  host  defense  against  attaching  and  effacing 

mammalian  host  response.  Immunity  2018;  49:545–59.e5.

bacterial  pathogens.  Nat  Med  2008;  14:282–289.

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society 
for Immunology, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 197: 193–204

203

Metabolism at the centre of the host–microbe relationshipREVIEW SERIES: TRANSLATING IMMUNOMETABOLISM  110  Mizoguchi  A.  Healing  of  intestinal  inflammation  by  IL-22. 

enhances  Citrobacter-induced  colitis  in  mice.  Infect  Immun 

Inflamm  Bowel  Dis  2012;  18:1777–84.

2005;  73:5468–81.

  111  Allam  R,  Maillard  MH,  Tardivel  A  et  al.  Epithelial  NAIPs 

  119  Reese  TA,  Wakeman  BS,  Choi  HS  et  al.  Helminth  infection 

protect  against  colonic  tumorigenesis.  J  Exp  Med  2015; 

reactivates  latent  γ-herpesvirus  via  cytokine  competition  at  a 

212:369–83.

viral  promoter.  Science  2014;  345:573–7.

  112  Behnsen  J,  Jellbauer  S,  Wong  CP  et  al.  The  cytokine  IL-22 

  120  Osborne  LC,  Monticelli  LA,  Nice  TJ  et  al.  Virus-helminth 

promotes  pathogen  colonization  by  suppressing  related 

coinfection  reveals  a  microbiota-independent  mechanism  of 

commensal  bacteria.  Immunity  2014;  40:262–73.

immunomodulation.  Science  2014;  345:578–82.

  113  Grizotte-Lake  M,  Zhong  G,  Duncan  K  et  al.  Commensals 

  121  Hsieh Y-J, Fu C-L, Hsieh MH. Helminth-induced interleukin-4 

suppress  intestinal  epithelial  cell  retinoic  acid  synthesis  to 

abrogates  invariant  natural  killer  T  cell  activation-associated 

regulate interleukin-22 activity and prevent microbial dysbiosis. 

clearance  of  bacterial 

infection. 

Infect 

Immun  2014; 

Immunity  2018;  49:1103–15.e6.

82:2087–97.

  114  Stecher  B,  Robbiani  R,  Walker  AW  et  al.  Salmonella  enterica 

  122  Zaiss  MM,  Rapin  A,  Lebon  L  et  al.  The  intestinal  microbiota 

serovar  Typhimurium  exploits  inflammation  to  compete  with 

contributes  to  the  ability  of  helminths  to  modulate  allergic 

the  intestinal  microbiota.  PLOS  Biol  2007;  5:e244.

inflammation.  Immunity  2015;  43:998–1010.

  115  Sekirov  I,  Gill  N,  Jogova  M  et  al.  Salmonella  SPI-1-mediated 

  123  Ramanan  D,  Bowcutt  R,  Lee  SC  et  al.  Helminth  infection 

neutrophil recruitment during enteric colitis is associated with 

promotes colonization resistance via type 2 immunity. Science 

reduction and alteration in intestinal microbiota. Gut Microbes 

2016;  352:608–12.

2010;  1:30–41.

  124  Reynolds  LA,  Redpath  SA,  Yurist-Doutsch  S  et  al.  Enteric 

  116  Spiga  L,  Winter  MG,  Furtado  de  Carvalho  T  et  al.  Oxidative 

helminths  promote  salmonella  coinfection  by  altering  the 

central  metabolism  enables  salmonella  to  utilize  microbiota-

intestinal  metabolome.  J  Infect  Dis  2017;  215:1245–54.

derived  succinate.  Cell  Host  Microbe  2017;  22:291–301.e6.

  125  Binion  D,  Rafiee  P.  Is  inflammatory  bowel  disease  a  vascular 

  117  Su L, Su C, Qi Y et al. Coinfection with an intestinal helminth 

disease? Targeting angiogenesis improves chronic inflammation 

impairs  host  innate  immunity  against  Salmonella  enterica 

in 

inflammatory  bowel  disease.  Gastroenterology  2009; 

serovar  Typhimurium  and  exacerbates  intestinal  inflammation 

136:400–3.

in  mice.  Infect  Immun  2014;  82:3855–66.

  126  Khan  MT,  Duncan  SH,  Stams  AJM,  van  Dijl  JM,  Flint  HJ, 

  118  Chen  C-C,  Louie  S,  McCormick  B,  Walker  WA,  Shi  HN. 

Harmsen HJM. The gut anaerobe Faecalibacterium prausnitzii 

Concurrent  infection  with  an  intestinal  helminth  parasite 

uses  an  extracellular  electron  shuttle  to  grow  at  oxic-anoxic 

impairs  host  resistance  to  enteric  Citrobacter  rodentium  and 

interphases.  ISME  J  2012;  6:1578–85.

204

© 2019 The Authors. Clinical & Experimental Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of British Society for 
Immunology, Clinical and Experimental Immunology, 197: 193–204

K. M. MaslowskiREVIEW SERIES: TRANSLATING IMMUNOMETABOLISM