ll

Magazine

Editorial
Consider the 
microbe

Florian Maderspacher

The Reverend had been out. In his 
absence, his ingenious apparatus 
had been destroyed by an ominous 
accident, and the experiment he had 
been running for nearly seven years 
had come to an unseemly end. In 
his apparatus, the Reverend William 
Dallinger, avid microscopist and 
follower of Darwin, had kept cultures 
of different unicellular eukaryotes, 
increasing the temperature of the 
cultures by small increments over 
long periods of time. Remarkably, by 
the time his culture apparatus was 
destroyed, the protists thrived at 70°C, 
while they were unable to exist at their 
previous optimal temperature. What 
Dallinger had observed looked like 
gradual adaptation of organisms to 
a changing environment — evolution 
in action. (A less exciting alternative 
would be that a heat-tolerant species 
already present in his starting culture 
was the sole survivor and took over.)

The approach Dallinger had 
conceptualized — experimental 
evolution using microbes — has 
followed a crooked path over the 
last century and a half: off to a false 
start, largely forgotten and sidelined, 
reinvigorated in the mid 20th century. 
Finally, in the last three decades, it 
has become an incredibly fruitful area 
of research that has deepened our 
understanding of evolution in many 
different areas, in ways Dallinger and 
Darwin could have only dreamt of.

Dallinger conducted his experiments 
between 1880 and 1886, during a time 
known as the ‘eclipse of Darwinism’. 
This ‘eclipse’ — a catchphrase coined 
by Julian Huxley — was largely due 
to a perceived impotence of natural 
selection as a mechanism of adaptation 
and diversiﬁ cation. Dallinger, though 
not a professional scientist, was by no 
means an outsider: he was president 
of the microscopic society and 
corresponded with Darwin, who found 
his earlier preliminary results “extremely 
curious and valuable”. Dallinger’s 
ﬁ ndings were even reported in the 
popular press. And as Dallinger had 

Microbial transparency: Glass sculpture of a Salmonella by artist Luke Jarram. Image: Luke 
Jarram.

ﬁ rst realized, experimental evolution 
on microbes could potentially provide 
a direct window into the evolutionary 
process which otherwise occurred over 
long time periods. 

Traditionally, the study of evolution 
was driven by a ‘naturalist approach’. 
Evolutionary patterns had to be 
inferred from a sparse fossil record 
or from the natural history of animals 
and plants alive today. Since the 
late 19th century, artiﬁ cial selection 
experiments on plants and animals, 
such as William Castle’s experiments 
on coat color in rats, became a new 
line of research in evolution. However, 
these experiments were cumbersome, 
due to slow generation times and 
difﬁ culty in maintaining reasonably 
sized populations of test subjects. By 
comparison, microbial experimental 
evolution approaches offered many 
advantages: a very short generation 
time, large population size, easily 
controllable and manipulatable culture 
conditions. It is curious that Dallinger’s 
early experiments did not inspire more 
repetition. 

For the ﬁ rst one hundred years or so, 

microbiology and evolutionary biology 
largely ignored each other. Microbiology 
was beginning to ﬂ ourish when Darwin 
developed his theory. And Darwin in 
his all-encompassing view of biology 

did think evolution by natural selection 
was also relevant to microbes and vice 
versa. Not only did he collect microbes 
while on the Beagle, he also discussed 
them in The Origin, countering the 
misconceived notion of why such 
presumed ‘simple’ forms had not been 
replaced by more complex ones if 
everything tended to evolve towards 
more complexity. People like Lamarck 
went to great lengths to explain this 
by claiming that new microbes arose 
continuously and spontaneously from 
inorganic matter while their ancestors 
complexiﬁ ed away. Darwin responded 
that they were probably more complex 
than this notion entailed and could 
be so well adapted that there was 
no selective advantage in further 
complexiﬁ cation.

Microbes have remained on the 
sidelines of evolutionary biology for a 
long time. Even today, ﬂ ipping open a 
modern evolution textbook will reveal 
a bestiary of birds, ﬁ shes or insects, 
as well as examples from plants, 
whereas microbes — the oldest, most 
abundant and most diverse life forms 
on Earth — still only feature marginally. 
There may be cultural reasons, rooted 
in the sociology of science: while many 
evolutionists were dyed-in-the-wool 
naturalists, who concerned themselves 
with the diversity of macroscopic life, 

R1096  Current Biology 30, R1096–R1169, October 5, 2020 © 2020 Published by Elsevier Inc.

Magazine

most microbiologists were chieﬂ y 
concerned with how the insights from 
microbiology could be applied in 
medicine or biotechnology and did not 
embrace Darwin’s theory as readily 
as other disciplines. Then there were 
biological reasons: microbes were seen 
as reproducing asexually and seemed 
to lack many of the astonishingly 
complex features that evolutionists 
aimed to explain — although early 
microbial naturalists, like Christian 
Ehrenberg, had noted the intricate and 
complex inner lives of microbes. This 
had led to a view, widespread among 
evolutionists, that microbes were just 
too odd to bother with, or, as expressed 
by Julian Huxley in his 1942 book on 
the modern evolutionary synthesis, 
that “the processes of variation, 
heredity and evolution in bacteria are 
quite different from the corresponding 
processes in multicellular organisms”. 
And so, microbes fell by the wayside 
of the modern synthesis, which 
integrated these processes into a more 
wholesome picture of evolution. 
Around the time the modern 

synthesis was formulated, however, 
this state of affairs did begin to change, 
and Dallinger’s ingenious approach 
to evolution — its recapitulation in 
controlled lab settings — began to 
develop into a serious and inﬂ uential 
line of research that ﬂ ourishes to this 
day. The 1930s and 40s had seen a 
surge in interest in microbes, mainly 
because biochemical genetics — like 
the work of George Beadle and Edward 
Tatum linking metabolic variants of 
the fungus Neurospora to genetic 
mutations — was making great strides 
in unraveling the fundamental workings 
of life and its fundamental unity.

Technical innovations kindled an 

interest in using bacteria to study 
evolutionary processes; in particular the 
‘chemostat’, an apparatus that allowed 
the maintenance of a bacterial culture in 
an open controlled system over much 
longer times than in a regular culture. 
One of the ﬁ rst discoveries of such 
experiments, by Leo Szilard and Aaron 
Novick, working with chemostats, and 
Kim Atwood, Lillian Schneider and 
Francis Ryan, working with closed 
cultures in serial dilution, was ‘periodic 
selection’, what we would call today 
‘selective sweeps’. Under constant 
conditions, after time new bacterial 
clones would outperform and outgrow 

ll

Early adapter: Dallinger‘s culture apparatus pioneering experimental evolution (image from Bio-
diversity Heritage Library, contributed by New York Botanical Garden/LuEsther T. Mertz Library).

others in the culture, only to be later 
outcompeted themselves. As Francis 
Ryan, one of the pioneers of this 
early wave of experimental evolution, 
put it: “these experiments prove that 
selection is a powerful force for ﬁ xing 
and perpetuating those rare mutations 
that do give an advantage”. For the 
ﬁ rst time, the dynamics of evolutionary 
processes could be observed in real 
time. 

Experimental evolution with microbes 

offered many advantages: controlled 
conditions, short generation times 
and vast population sizes. The latter 
is particularly important in an area 
where the slow but lasting impact of 
microbiology on our understanding of 

evolution is particularly evident — the 
nature of mutations as raw material in 
the evolutionary process. Darwin had 
seen evolution as an unobservably 
slow process of incremental change. 
The ‘mutationist’ school of thought — 
scientists like Hugo DeVries or William 
Bateson — postulated in the late 19th, 
early 20th century that large-effect 
mutations could lead to substantive 
changes in phenotype, even to entirely 
new species. By contrast, early 
geneticists, in particular Thomas Hunt 
Morgan and his followers, worked on 
spontaneous and induced mutations 
that largely seemed disruptive to the 
organism and had fairly minor effects. 
It remained unclear how from such 

Current Biology 30, R1096–R1169, October 5, 2020  R1097

ll

mutations new, better adapted forms 
could arise. Particularly unclear was 
whether mutations represented an 
autonomous random (with respect to 
ﬁ tness effects) process or whether they 
were a response to the environment. 
This was especially true for bacteria, 
where quasi-Lamarckian processes 
were still thought to be at work for 
a longer time. Bacteriology was, 
as Salvador Luria put it, “the last 
stronghold of Lamarckism”.

Rather than experimental evolution 
per se, it was cleverly crafted genetic 
experiments on bacteria that ﬁ rst 
showed that mutations conferring 
a selective advantage do arise 
independently of the environment 
to which they confer adaption. 
In particular, the experiments by 
Salvador Luria and Max Delbrück on 
bacteriophage-resistant bacteria and 
the iconic replica-plating experiment 
of Esther and Joshua Lederberg, 
revealed that mutant bacteria adapted 
to phages or antibiotics were resistant 
before having been exposed to the 
selective environmental agent, arguing 
against the quasi-Lamarckian notion 
of mutations being induced by the 
selective environment. It was thus 
microbiology that afﬁ rmed one of the 
foundational building blocks of the 
modern evolutionary synthesis, namely 
that mutations occur at random with 
respect to their effects on ﬁ tness 
and that they provide the fodder for 
selection to favor mutations that adapt 
populations to their environment. 

Curiously, however, the idea that 
the origins of mutations might not 
be entirely blind with regard to their 
potential adaptive value never went 
away completely. In the late 1980s, 
based on experiments in bacteria, John 
Cairns and others resurrected the idea 
that mutations arise in a biased fashion 
that is contingent on the selective 
environment encountered. While this 
postulated ‘adaptive mutation’ was 
a dead end and refuted, the study 
of mutation in bacteria continued to 
reveal surprises. Mutations arise due 
to inherent instabilities in the chemical 
constituents of DNA. But the rate at 
which mutations remain in the genome 
is the result of a number of biological 
repair mechanisms, whose machinery is 
itself the result of evolution. Mutations 
in bacteria that increase the mutation 
rate have been known since pioneering 

studies in the 1970s and 80s. They tend 
to excite some researchers because 
they may be taken as a biological 
incarnation of evolvability — the 
notion that the ability to change during 
evolution is itself an adaptive trait that 
can be selected for. In general, as 
more mutations usually means more 
deleterious mutations, such mutators 
are thought to be selected for only 
indirectly, by hitchhiking on other, 
beneﬁ cial mutations.

Nonetheless, there may be 

conditions, for instance under extreme 
stress, where the mutation rate rockets 
up as a response to environmental 
stressors, when a temporarily increased 
mutation rate (hypermutation) may be 
beneﬁ cial. Higher mutation rates may 
be the norm in the natural environment 
of bacterial populations, or when they 
are confronted with drugs, which may 
have important repercussions when 
thinking about the current antibiotics 
resistance crisis. Whether this is 
‘adaptive mutation’ redux or points to 
a more fundamental mechanism that 
justiﬁ es reconsidering some of our 
basic assumptions about mutations 
remains to be seen. In this case, a 
shift towards the study of bacteria in 
more naturalistic environments, less 
as models for general evolutionary 
processes, rather as subjects in their 
own right, may reveal fundamentals 
about the evolutionary process that 
might altogether modify the very ediﬁ ce 
of evolutionary theory. 

In the second half of the 20th century, 

experimental microbial evolution 
diversiﬁ ed. Part of the research program 
was focused on solving important 
new questions in evolutionary biology, 
such as to what degree adaptation 
is driven by random processes, like 
genetic drift, or purely by selection. 
Another branch of the ﬁ eld concerned 
itself with teaching bacteria new tricks, 
such as new enzymatic functions. The 
current golden age of experimental 
microbial evolution began in February 
of 1988, when — a good century after 
Dallinger’s mishap — Richard Lenski 
and his lab initiated an experimental 
evolution experiment that has become 
the beacon of the entire ﬁ eld and has 
ﬁ nally gotten microbes the recognition 
among evolutionists they deserve. 
This long-term evolution experiment, 
the LTEE, consists of twelve identical 
replicate populations of E. coli that are 

R1098  Current Biology 30, R1096–R1169, October 5, 2020

Magazine

kept in standard culture medium and 
serially propagated. A major motivating 
question behind this project, and 
the reason for the replication, was 
the old chestnut of constraint versus 
contingency in evolution. Would each 
of the populations evolve in a similar 
way, or would there be signiﬁ cant 
differences? This question traces back 
to philosophical debates about the very 
nature of evolution — are the forms 
we see around us, and we ourselves, 
the result of chance events or are they 
inevitable? It is also a question that 
studies on macrobes only rarely get to 
address.

One of the strikes of genius with 
the LTEE was that Lenski just kept it 
running. Contrary to what one would 
have naively expected, evolution just 
never stops. While the dynamics of 
adaptation slowed down — large-
effect mutations dominated in earlier 
phases of the experiment and ﬁ tness 
gains became smaller as it went on — 
much like in the periodic selection 
experiments, evolution never ceased. 
One of the ﬁ rst ﬁ ndings from the 
LTEE was that several of the cultures 
evolved, at least temporarily, higher 
mutation rates, which led to faster 
adaptation. In one of the replicates, a 
miniature ecosystem evolved where 
one strain of bacterium would feed off 
the metabolites of the other. And ﬁ fteen 
years into the experiment, an entirely 
unexpected evolutionary novelty arose, 
allowing the bacteria to metabolize 
citrate. Regarding contingency versus 
constraint, genome sequencing revealed 
pervasive parallel evolution — in many 
of the replicate evolving cultures the 
same genes were selected for, but only 
rarely identical mutations. 

From Dallinger’s humble beginnings, 

the experimental microbial evolution 
studies of today have stepped out of 
the shadows of macrobial evolution 
and turned into an amazingly fruitful 
scientiﬁ c endeavor. While initially the 
perceived otherness of microbes 
prevented their being incorporated into 
the modern evolutionary synthesis, 
the power of bacterial experimentation 
in genetics and evolution revealed 
that not only do the fundamentals of 
evolution apply to microbes just as 
well, they are also exquisite model 
systems for observing the dynamics 
and mechanisms of the evolutionary 
process in real time. Far from being 

Magazine

mere stand-ins for higher organisms, 
microbes have since become 
emancipated and turned subjects of 
evolutionary study in their own right. 
This is particularly true in ﬁ elds such 
as the evolution of cooperation and 
sociality, where unexpected complexity 
revealed itself, and studies on microbes 
provided the ﬁ rst empirical proofs 
of theoretical concepts formulated 
decades ago.

The microbial view of evolution 
has a lot to offer, precisely because 
the otherness of microbes belies 
foundational concepts of biology, such 
as species or lineages. Much ink has 
been spilled on whether the notion of 
a species even applies to bacteria that 
can differ dramatically in their genomic 
makeup even within taxonomic units, 
and whether it even makes sense to 
regard bacterial ‘species’ as a unit of 
evolution, as, say, Darwin’s ﬁ nches. 
Given excessive gene swapping among 
microbes, the concept of an organismal 
lineage becomes equally porous. What 
becomes apparent from the study of 
bacteria in more natural settings is that 
they often form highly interdependent 
‘super entities’, such as bioﬁ lms, that 
even transcend the idea of the individual 
organism. Such highly integrated 
communities that may even evolve 
as a unit are reminiscent of how Carl 
Woese — the Darwin of the microbial 
world — had envisaged pre-cellular 
communities of ‘progenotes’ at the very 
base of the evolutionary network of life. 
That such integration, once thought to be 
a hallmark of evolutionary sophistication, 
is found already with the most basic and 
most widespread life forms is another 
lesson to be learned from considering 
the microbe in evolution. Whether or not 
the fundamental laws of evolution have 
to be re-formulated remains to be seen. 
But perhaps one day we will say that 
just like nothing in biology makes sense 
except in the light of evolution, nothing in 
evolution makes sense except in the light 
of microbiology. Our special issue — 
largely the brainchild of my colleague 
Christine Cosma — aims to provide a 
taste of this perspective, so we can see 
life on Earth as what it fundamentally 
is — a microbial world. 

Florian Maderspacher is Current Biology’s 
Senior Editor. 
E-mail: ﬂ orian.maderspacher@current-biology.
com

ll

Feature
Gut check

Research on the gut microbiome and its relationship to our health, even our 
behaviors, has captured the public’s interest, and the probiotic industry has moved 
in to capitalize. The ﬁ eld has advanced so quickly that some of the claims may have 
outpaced the evidence. Cyrus Martin reports. 

The start of the 21st century has been 
marked by a number of headline-
grabbing medical advances, including 
the ability to manipulate our genomes 
with CRISPRs and the harnessing of 
the immune system to seek out and 
destroy cancer. Certainly on the shortlist 
of hot medical trends is an increased 
awareness that our bodies are engaged 
in an intimate embrace with billions of 
microbes that we depend on for our 
health and wellbeing. If we are to believe 
some of the claims, these microbes 
not only feed us, but are necessary for 
a host of other bodily functions and — 
shockingly — may even manipulate our 
behavior for their own beneﬁ t. Most 
of the attention has focused on the 
community of microbes that inhabit the 
gut — the so-called ‘gut microbiome’. 
But there are other microbiomes as 
well, including the skin microbiome, the 
vagina microbiome, and on and on. 

In the case of the gut microbiome, we 
are not talking about a small number of 
stowaways. Some estimates suggest 

the number of gut microbes equals 
or exceeds the number of cells in 
the human body. And this, perhaps, 
explains some of the allure — that the 
microbiome could be viewed as an 
essential part of our bodies that we were 
previously blind to, as if we had lived 
our whole lives without knowing we had 
a liver. Indeed, the gut microbiome has 
been likened to an organ of sorts.
Yet another way to view the gut 

microbiome is as a complex ecosystem, 
like a tropical rainforest, where many of 
the constituents depend on each other 
and where the smallest disturbance can 
upset the delicate balance, potentially 
leading to disease. This is a theme 
that runs through much of the talk 
surrounding the gut microbiome and has 
been seized on not only by researchers 
but also by those hoping to leverage the 
gut microbiome for ﬁ nancial gain. We are 
told, for example, that our depression 
and anxiety can be explained by a 
microbiome that is ‘out of whack’ or, to 
use the fancy medical jargon, that we 

Promises in a pill: The probiotic industry claims you can promote health by restoring balance to 
your gut microbiome, which they say can be achieved by taking a simple pill. But, to date, there 
is little evidence that probiotics are effective. (Photo: stevepb/Pixabay.)

Current Biology 30, R1096–R1169, October 5, 2020  R1099

