Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Microbiological Research 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/micres 

Deciphering plant-microbe crosstalk through proteomics studies 

Akansha Jain a, Harikesh Bahadur Singh b, Sampa Das a,* 
a Division of Plant Biology, Bose Institute Centenary Campus, P 1/12, CIT Scheme, VII-M, Kankurgachi, Kolkata, 700054, West Bengal, India 
b Department of Mycology and Plant Pathology, Institute of Agricultural Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, 221005, India   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Beneficial microbes 
2D gel electrophoresis 
Plant defense 
Plant-microbe interaction 
Proteome 

Proteomic  approaches  are  being  used  to  elucidate  a  better  discretion  of  interactions  occurring  between  host, 
pathogen, and/or beneficial microorganisms at the molecular level. Application of proteomic techniques, unravel 
pathogenicity, stress-related, and antioxidant proteins expressed amid plant-microbe interactions and good in-
formation have been generated. It is being perceived that a fine regulation of protein expression takes place for 
effective  pathogen  recognition,  induction  of  resistance,  and  maintenance  of  host  integrity.  However,  our 
knowledge of molecular plant-microbe interactions is still incomplete and inconsequential. This review aims to 
provide insight into numerous ways used for proteomic investigation including peptide/protein identification, 
separation, and quantification during host defense response. Here, we highlight the current progress in prote-
omics  of  defense  responses  elicited  by  bacterial,  fungal,  and  viral  pathogens  in  plants  along  with  which  the 
proteome level changes induced by beneficial microorganisms are also discussed.   

1. Introduction 

Biotic factors influence plant growth, reproduction, and yield. Plants 
are surrounded by a large number of microorganisms, some are bene-
ficial for them while others cause diseases. Phytopathogens cause a large 
number  of  serious  diseases  and  huge  yield  losses  in  crops.  Plants  are 
somewhat equipped with a broad range of defense mechanisms either at 
the  constitutive  level  or  induced  upon  pathogenic  contact  or  even 
modulated  by  beneficial  rhizospheric  or  endophytic  microbes  (Jain 
et al., 2012). The study of host plants interacting with these pathogenic 
or  beneficial  microorganisms  has  experienced  potential  advancement 
due to the development of omics techniques. The advent of the microbe 
in close contact with plants reprogram plants’ defense response and here 
the  importance  of  proteins  in  the  plant-microbe  interaction  becomes 
pivotal because: (1) they maintain cellular homeostasis 2). They are key 
regulators of signaling networks and cellular processes. Plant immune 
response is a function of composite networks of proteins with diverse 
roles in executing crosstalk between signals and other proteins. 

Plants  exhibit  a  variety  of  responses  against  biotic  stresses  that 
enable them to escape or  survive under adverse conditions.  Plant de-
fense  mechanism  involves  perception,  recognition  of  pathogen  and  a 
large  number  of  signaling  events  in  response  to  the  upcoming  patho-
genic ingress (Fig. 1). These response pathways need to be quick and 
specific  in  order  to  endure  with  the  damage  generated  due  to  stress. 

Perception of the pathogens is linked to sensing of pathogen-associated 
molecular  patterns  (PAMPs),  viz.,  lipo-oligosaccharides  and  chitin  by 
pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), is the first step in plant’s innate 
immune  response  (Jones  and  Dangl,  2006).  The  perception  of  PAMP 
leads to the establishment of PAMP- triggered immunity (PTI) (Boller 
and  Felix,  2009).  Successful  phytopathogens  can  suppress  PTI  by 
releasing  effector  proteins  that  suppress  PTI  reaction,  resulting  in 
effector-triggered  susceptibility  (ETS)  alternatively,  they  may  also 
manipulate the host’s secretion system (Kaffarnik et al., 2009). These 
effector molecules target a spectrum of cellular systems in the plant’s 
cell, stimulating expression of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases 
(Zhang  et  al.,  2007),  aspects  of  RNA  processes  (Fu  et  al.,  2007),  and 
protein secretion (Nomura et al., 2006). The explicit or oblique recog-
nition  of  effectors  (called  then  avirulence-avr-factors)  by  plant  resis-
tance (R) proteins causes activation of effector-triggered immunity (ETI) 
(Pel  and  Pieterse,  2013).  ETI  is  customarily  connected  with  greater 
uninterrupted and stronger immune reaction inclusive of programmed 
cell death, which is referred to as hypersensitive response and systemic 
acquired resistance (SAR) in the host (Jones and Dangl, 2006). 

Defense strategy of plant involves the production of phytohormones 
like salicylic acid (SA), jasmonic acid (JA), and ethylene (ET) that have 
essential  roles  in  the  signaling  pathways  (Robert-Seilaniantz  et  al., 
2011).  Additionally,  auxin,  abscisic  acid,  cytokinins,  and  brassinoste-
roids work for fine-tuning of the defense response and are also reported 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail addresses: akansha007@rediffmail.com (A. Jain), hbs1@rediffmail.com (H.B. Singh), sampa@jcbose.ac.in (S. Das).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2020.126590 
Received 19 April 2020; Received in revised form 21 August 2020; Accepted 21 August 2020   

MicrobiologicalResearch242(2021)126590Availableonline28September20200944-5013/©2020PublishedbyElsevierGmbH.ThisarticleismadeavailableundertheElsevierlicense(http://www.elsevier.com/open-access/userlicense/1.0/).A. Jain et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

to be manipulated by beneficial rhizospheric microbes (Pieterse et al., 
2012;  Jain  et  al.,  2015,  2020).  Reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS)  and 
reactive nitrogen species (RNS) along with different kinases including 
MAP  kinase  (MAPK)  are  produced  within  a  few  minutes  of  pathogen 
perception (Scheler et al., 2013). Activation of MAPK cascade by het-
erotrimeric, Guanine nucleotide binding proteins or ‘G-proteins’ has also 
been  investigated  for  necrotrophic  and  hemi-biotrophic  pathogens 
(Patel et al., 2016). ROS work in providing toughness by cross-linking of 
cell wall polymers and have antimicrobial activity (Torres, 2010; Jain 
et al., 2013a). 

The nature of such interaction not only depends upon the life cycle of 
the invading pathogen (Doehlemann and Hemetsberger, 2013), the ge-
netic makeup of the host plant (Gimenez-Ibanez and Solano, 2013) but 
also upon the interacting beneficial microbes (Jain et al., 2013b). During 
the course of defense adequate mRNA does not necessarily correlate to 
the  corresponding  protein  to  be  active  or  abundant  in  the  plant  cells 
(Jones et al., 2004). Proteins are the real workhorses in the living cell, 
constantly responding to their surrounding environment, denoting the 
active state of the cell. Large numbers of studies have been performed to 
unravel  plant-microbe  interactions.  Proteomic  is  used  to  understand 
intensive knowledge of lots of elements of the plant defense to cope up 
with the pathogenic challenge (Chatterjee et al., 2014). The differential 
abundance  of  proteins,  post-transcriptional,  post-translational  modifi-
cations,  protein  stimulation/repression,  and  turnover  are  now  been 
studied using this approach (Zimaro et al., 2011). The advent of new 
techniques and software have made the study and identification process 
relatively easier. A large number of proteins responsive to pathogenic 
challenges have been recognized but very less knowledge is accessible 
about  proteins  involved  in  biological  management  of  the  disease. 
Studies at proteome level will help us to get insights into protein func-
tion, expression, interactions, and localization giving a clear depiction of 
this complex interaction. 

The  proteomic  approach  can  help  in  analyzing  the  wide  range  of 

protein profiles that could, in turn, provide insights to understand the 
defense  responses  of  the  plant  as  the  outcome  of  the  host-pathogen 
interaction  and  such  interaction  in  the  presence  of  beneficial  mi-
crobes. Relatively quicker tools and techniques not only provide easy 
identification,  predictions  of  structure  and  functions  but  also  help  in 
predicting  more  accurate  localization  of  these  proteins  in  cells. 
Increasing information on full genome sequences of various plant spe-
cies  will  speed  up  the  identification  of  defense  responsive  genes  and 
their categorized function. While going deeper into gene regulation it 
has  been  realized  that  questions  arising  regarding  epigenetic  control, 
interactions  with  pre-existing  proteins,  non-  coding  RNAs,  post- 
translational  modifications  can  only  be  answered  through  experi-
mental data based on proteomic approach (Quirino et al., 2010). A new 
era of science is open, coupling proteomics with genomics and metab-
olomics, together giving a better portrayal of how the cell works. This 
review will briefly discuss the current progress in the proteomic research 
with special emphasis on biotic stress-responsive host proteins induced 
upon interaction with pathogens and/or biocontrol agents. We feature 
the important results obtained from the proteome profiles of different 
plant-microbe association. 

2. Techniques involved in proteomics 

Proteomics  has  come  out  as  an  influential  means  for  the  study  of 
complex plant-pathogen interactions (Jain et al., 2015). Analysis of a 
group of proteins under definitive plant-microbe association specifies a 
more  clear-cut  view  of  physiological  and  cellular  mechanisms  than 
analyzing DNA or RNA. Study at proteome level allows the concurrent 
study  of  the  total  proteome  that  is  present  in  a  particular  organism, 
together with its cataloguing, its qualitative presence and quantitative 
abundance, localization, and variation within a population. Application 
of proteomics may also help in deciphering role of different proteins in 
development and growth, changes induced at proteome level by biotic 

Fig.  1. Schematic  depiction  of  the  plant  immune  system  upon  challenge  with  pathogen,  pathogen-associated  molecular  patterns  (PAMPs)  stimulate  pattern- 
recognition receptors (PRRs) in the plants, resulting in PAMP-triggered immunity (PTI). This may lead to two possibilities, 1) pathogens may, in turn, acquire ef-
fectors (E) proteins (blue triangles) to overcome PTI, resulting in effector-triggered susceptibility (ETS) leading to disease and 2) plants may acquire resistance (R) 
proteins (orange) that recognize these effectors, resulting in effector-triggered immunity (ETI) leading to resistance. 

MicrobiologicalResearch242(2021)1265902A. Jain et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

and abiotic factors, post-translational alterations and associations with 
other proteins and molecules (Fern´andez and Novo, 2011). 

a 

biphasic  micro-capillary 

A large number of proteomic studies are based on employing simple 
gel-based resolution, as separated proteins can be easily recognized and 
defined  applying mass spectrometry  (MS). Most  popular among them 
being  two-dimensional  gel  electrophoresis  (2DE)  resolving  proteins 
based on isoelectric point (pI) and their molecular weight. Differential 
gel  electrophoresis  (DIGE)  is  a  protein  quantification  technique 
resolving  protein  in  complex  mixtures  combining  gel  electrophoresis 
with  the  exemplary  protein  spectra  gained  by  fluorescent  tagging  of 
samples  (Granlund  et  al.,  2009).  This  method  regulates  gel-to-gel 
alteration as differently labeled proteins can be resolved on the same 
gel, but  the concerns  of  spot overlap still  remains unsolved  (Roe and 
Griffin, 2006). Gel-free methods utilizing liquid chromatography (LC) 
can overcome the issues of overlapping of spots by resolving peptides 
after  sequence-specific  digestion  significantly  increasing  inclusion  of 
proteins  with  MS-based  sequencing  (Fig.  2)  (Roe  and  Griffin,  2006). 
Later  multidimensional  protein  identification  technology  (MudPIT) 
(Washburn  et  al.,  2001)  came  out  as  a  impressive  approach  for 
large-scale proteomic studies. It involves loading of the peptide mixture 
on 
with 
strong-cation-exchange and reversed-phase matter (Knief et al., 2011). 
Nearly  all  peptide-based  quantitative  studies  are  correlative  or 
analogous. Recent developments include the isotope-coded affinity tag 
(ICAT),  isobaric  tag  for  relative  and  absolute  quantification  (iTRAQ), 
18O.  Absolute  quantification  of 
and  tryptic  digestion  of  samples  in  H2
peptides  (AQUA)  depends  on  the  construction  of  isotopically  labeled 
peptide internal controls (Agrawal et al., 2013). Stable isotope labeling 
of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), involves growing them in media 
amended  with  heavy  isotope-containing  amino  acids  thus  permitting 
labeling  of  generated  proteins  (Ong  et  al.,  2002).  Proteomic  studies 
involving metabolic labeling can be accomplished using stable isotope of 
nitrogen (15N inorganic salts) as a sole nitrogen source (Mcllwain et al., 
2008).  MS/MS-based 
includes 
sequential  windowed  acquisition  of  all  theoretical  fragment  ion  mass 
spectra  (SWATH).  SWATH™  permits  the  differentiation  of  isobaric 
peptides, followed by data mining of unpredicted species (Sidoli et al., 
2015). The cost is an important consideration while quantification as 
labeling  techniques  are  costlier  in  comparison  to  label-free  methods, 
where the later is time taking. Newly coming up proteomics techniques 
for  subcellular  studies  include  organelle-locatable  reactive  molecules 

label-free  quantification  strategy 

column 

loaded 

Fig. 2. Schematic overview of approaches used in proteomic studies.  

(ORMs) (Yasueda et al., 2016), and proximity-dependent biotin identi-
fication  (BioID)  (Le  Sage  et  al.,  2016).  It  is  difficult  to  characterize 
subcellular proteomes based on abundance, nature or localization (Liu 
et al., 2019). Therefore, this area of research offers enormous possibility 
for an increased number of future explorations. 

Many acquisition approaches have also been created for MS analysis, 
the  most  extensively  used  being  the  shotgun  or  discovery  proteomics 
which is the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. DDA chooses 
precursor ions that can be discovered at the full scan accordingly from 
the  strongest  ones  to  perform  MS/MS  fragmentation  (Aebersold  and 
Mann,  2003).  Data-independent  acquisition  (DIA)  on  the  other  hand, 
has  come  up  as  a  sensitive,  effective  mode  for  large-scale  proteome 
analysis, as a substitute to DDA (Di et al., 2017). A mass defect-based 
four-plex DIA hybrid method  (MdFDIA) using cell cultures developed 
in media amended with the isotopes 13C15
6N2-lysine and D8-lysine was 
studied (Di et al., 2017). After the labelling, the protein specimens were 
digested with Lys-C and peptides were further allowed to grow in vitro 
with  light  (213CD2H+34.06312  Da)  and  heavy  (2CD3+34.06896  Da) 
dimethyl  groups.  The  exquisite  mass  variation  between  the  equally 
mixed labeled samples in MS2  scans are analyzed with high-resolution 
instrument to permit relative analysis. 

The  identification of  protein  is  the  most  crucial  step  in  proteomic 
studies. Mass spectrometry is the most comprehensive technique to do so 
and involves three steps namely, protein and/or peptide ionization, ion 
resolving  and  ion  detection.  Ionization  involves  two  main  techniques 
matrix-assisted  laser  desorption  ionization  (MALDI)  (Karas  and  Hill-
enkamp,  1988)  and  electrospray  ionization  (ESI)  (Fenn  et  al.,  1989). 
Surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization (SELDI), a modification of 
MALDI (Merchant and Weinberger, 2000) introduces surface affinity for 
numerous  proteins  and  peptides.  ESI  technique  has  also  observed 
improved sensitivity with the advancement of micro and nano-ESI, with 
decreased  flow  rates  to  nanoliter-per-minute  (Griffin  et  al.,  1991; 
Emmett and Caprioli, 1994). Mass analyzers are broadly grouped into 
the scanning and ion-beam mass spectrometers viz., time-of-flight (TOF) 
and quadrupole, and the trapping mass spectrometers, such as ion trap, 
orbitrap, and fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) (Mann 
et al., 2001; Chait, 2011). MS/MS involves forerunner ions in the pri-
mary MS scan (MS1) to be exposed to fragmentation, followed by suc-
cessive  MS  scans  (MS2)  (Gygi  and  Aebersold,  2000).  Fragmenting 
proteins  can  be  achieved  by  either  subjecting  the  peptides  to 
collision-activated  dissociation  (CAD  or  CID)  (Yates  et  al.,  2009)  or 
electron-based viz., electron capture dissociation (ECD) (Zubarev et al., 
1998) and electron transfer dissociation (ETD) (Syka et al., 2004). 

Bioinformatics  tools  have  aided  in  proteomic  data  analysis,  with 
simple assignment of protein and peptides to databases and their easy 
retrieval.  Search  algorithms  like  SEQUEST,  Mascot,  and  OMSSA  can 
correlate observed MS/MS spectra to datasets with known proteins to 
search for peptides (Kav et al., 2007; Jayaraman et al., 2012). Programs 
like PeptideProphet (Keller et al., 2002) and ProteinProphet (Nesvizh-
skii  et  al.,  2003)  are  created  to  upgrade  the  efficacy  of  peptide  and 
protein identification using statistics, while DBParser (Yang et al., 2004) 
is used to build-up redundant protein assignments. However, a few voids 
demand to be filled for high-throughput data analysis. A big concern in 
protein recognition is that the sequence databases does not assign sub-
stitute splice isoforms a particular entry or give them space only in the 
comments, thereby, declining to identify them as the aimed sequence, 
making it appear absent in the database explored (Huang et al., 2007). 
This may cause erroneous peptide and protein identification because of 
the availability of degenerate peptides comparable to various proteins in 
the algorithm. To solve such issues, iProXpress, has been build-up by The 
Protein Information Resource (Wu et al., 2003) has a broad sequence 
library consisting of available proteins and isoforms from the UniProt. 
Its application along with other software eases protein functional and 
pathway analysis for profiling (Huang et al., 2007). Proteins identified 
using different database are summarized along with the PIR ID mapping 
service, using protein and gene IDs from nearly thirty data resources to 

MicrobiologicalResearch242(2021)1265903A. Jain et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

UniProt. The raw proteomic data needs to be analyzed, structurally and 
functionally annotated, to present their biological significance (Fig. 3). 
The proteomic result can further be used for functional and structural 
annotation New approaches in proteomic studies in consolidation with 
bioinformatics  tools  will  further  improve  data  analysis  and  pathway 
revelation,  thereby,  aiding  improved  knowledge  acquisition  from 
genome-wide studies. 

3. Analysing post translational modifications 

Post-translational  modifications  (PTMs)  are  brisk,  reversible,  and 
definitive  chemical  modulation  affecting  protein  structure,  which  in 
turn  can  alter  protein  activity,  localization,  turnover,  and  interaction 
with  other  proteins  (Narayanan  and  Jacobson,  2009).  Several  PTMs 
such  as  phosphorylation,  acetylation,  ubiquitination,  glycosylation, 
methylation  and  sumoylation,  propel  transcriptional  regulation  and 
metabolism (Fig. 4). Plenty of reports highlight the importance of PTMs 
in  plant  resistance  with  phosphorylation  showing  utmost  significance 
(Park  et  al.,  2012;  Jones  et  al.,  2013).  Phosphoproteins  may  also  be 
isolated using a phosphoprotein affinity matrix. The resin holds phos-
phoproteins and other related proteins from cell fractions which may be 
separated further (Kristjansdottir et al., 2008). Phosphoproteins can be 
identified using 2DE, either by observing low pI isoforms, by phospho-
specific staining (e.g., ProQ®Diamond, carbocyanine dye), 32P-labeling, 
or  by  application  of  phosphospecific  antibodies  (Bindschedler  and 
Cramer, 2011; Bond et al., 2011). ProQ Diamond can be used in com-
bination  with  protein  stains,  such  as  SYPRO  Ruby,  allowing  protein 
phosphorylation  and  expression  to  be  monitored  at  the  same  time. 
ProQ®Diamond staining with subsequent MALDI-TOF MS/MS analysis 
was used to study differential expression of phosphorylated proteins in 
Nicotiana tabacum BY2 cells upon elicitation with lipopolysaccharides 
from Burkholderia cepacia (Gerber et al., 2006, 2008). It has also been 
reported  that  rapid  oxidative  burst  upon  pathogen  infection  leads  to 
PTMs  such  as  the  increment  in  protein  carbonylation  (Zhang  et  al., 
2007). 

Sumoylation  is  prerequisite  for  normal  cellular  processes,  defense 
response, and for pathogenic progress, conidia production and patho-
genic  virulence  (Liu  et  al.,  2019).  Proteomic  analysis  of  the  deletion 

Fig.  4. Proteins  are  edited  by  post-translational  modification  (PTMs)  which 
alter protein structure, function and stability, five types of PTMs are presented 
in  the  figure  (phosphorylation,  acetylation,  ubiquitination,  glycosylation, 
sumoylation). 

mutants for genes AOS1 and UBA2 (belonging to E1) and UBC9 (E2) and 
SIZ1 (E3) involved in the sumoylation pathway were studied in rice–-
Magnaporthe oryzae interaction (Liu et al., 2018). Out of 940 anticipated 

Fig. 3. Schematic experimental representation for proteomic data analysis during plant-microbe interaction.  

MicrobiologicalResearch242(2021)1265904A. Jain et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

sumoylated proteins, most of them were linked to conidium accumula-
tion and mobility, defense response, ROS detoxification, and signalling 
pathways.  PTMs  like  S-nitrosylation  and  sulfenylation,  have  gained 
increasing  importance  in  modulation  of  plant  immune  responses 
(Withers and Dong, 2017). In a previous study, biotin-switch approach 
along with MALDI-TOF was used to search for S-nitrosylated proteins in 
Arabidopsis  upon  challenge  with  Pseudomonas  syringae  pv.  tomato 
DC3000. The study implicated the role of S-nitrosylation of AtSABP3 in 
modulating the plant immune response (Wang et al., 2009). N-Glyco-
sylation of receptors is also involved in regulating the plant’s immune 
response. Studies using MALDI-TOF MS reported a ten-gene assemble of 
gigX genes of Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae, to be involved in flagellin 
glycosylation,  which  in  turn  regulated  mobility  and  pathogenicity  of 
X.  oryzae  (Yu  et  al.,  2018).  Proteomic  studies  have  also  helped  us  in 
understanding 
between 
communication 
chloroplast-nucleus, and its association with the plant immune response 
(Sperschneider et al., 2017). Development of bioinformatics tools has 
allowed  us  to  predict  a  large  number  of  genes  and  gene  products 
involved in plant-microbe interaction at initial dialogue or at different 
stages  of  disease  progression  or  those  involved  in  disease  resistance. 
Large-scale  proteomics  and  new  methods  can  be  implemented  to 
generate  important  discernment  into  signalling  pathways  and  the 
involvement of PTMs in and plant-microbe association (Table 1). 

occurring 

the 

4. Deciphering plant-microbe interactions 

Plants interact with a large number of microbes; some interactions 
give beneficial outcomes while other results being harmful. Plant dis-
eases cause huge crop losses every year around the world. On the other 
hand, beneficial plant-microbe interactions result in disease reduction as 
well as improved plant growth (Fig. 5). Studies at proteome level can 
thus be used to elucidate various cellular processes occurring during the 
perception of pathogens by plants in both compatible and incompatible 
interactions and those events induced by interacting microbes which are 
beneficial.  Studies  in  this  direction  can  not  only  help  us  to  identify 
proteins  but  can  also  provide  information  regarding  corresponding 
genes that may be applied to produce genetically engineered plants for 
biotic stress management and/or improving plant growth. Here we will 
discuss on proteomics approaches that have been studied previously to 
unravel plant-microbe interactions (Table 2). 

4.1. Plant-bacteria associations 

Plant-bacteria associations are highly composite and involve various 
signaling  molecules  that  influence  gene  expression  within  the  host 
plants, which finally defines whether the outcome of the interaction is 

Table 1 
New technologies and techniques applied for analysis of PTMs of proteins.  

PTMs 

Technique for analysis 

References 

Phosphorylation 

Acetylation 

Ubiquitination 

Glycosylation 

Sumoylation 

Sequential elution from Immobilized 
Metal ion Affinity Chromatography 
(SIMAC) 
In vivo affinity capture of a 
phosphorylated protein with antibiotic 
resistant cells 
Peptide prefractionation, immunoaffinity 
enrichment with LC-MS/MS and affinity 
purification for studying acetylome 
Ubiquitination site mapping using 
ubiquitin combined fractional diagonal 
chromatography 
Large scale glycopeptide profiling by 
activated ion electron dissociation 
SUMOylated proteins enriched via 
SUMO1 isoform from mutants plants with 
variation in ligases 

Thingholm and 
Larsen (2016) 

Meksiriporn et al. 
(2019) 

Jiang et al. (2018) 

Walton et al. 
(2016) 

Riley et al. (2019) 

Rytz et al. (2018)  

Fig. 5. Model for the systemic acquired resistance (SAR) and induced systemic 
resistance  (ISR)  pathways  induced  upon  interaction  with  pathogenic  and 
beneficial  microbes where  salicylic acid, jasmonic  acid  and ethylene  are  pre-
sented as SA, JA, and ET, respectively. 

beneficial or harmful. Bacteria have emerged with a huge array of spe-
cifically  designed  macromolecular  nanomachines  that  release  various 
virulence  factors.  Secretion  structures  (types  I–VI)  of  Gram-negative 
bacteria,  the  mycobacterial  type  VII,  the  chaperone–usher  pathway 
and  the  curli  secretion  system  are  elucidated  in  bacteria,  which  are 
differentiated  by  the  structural  proteins  building  them  (Costa  et  al., 
2015).  Type  II  machinery,  secretes  hydrolyzing  proteins,  toxins  and 
pathogenicity  elements.  Pathogenic  bacteria  mainly  use  the  type  III 
secretion  system  during  infection  which  enables  bacteria  to  straight 
forward  introduce  effector  proteins,  into  the  target  cell  and  sabotage 
cellular processes. (Mehta et al., 2008). 

The  proteome-based  analysis  of  plant-bacterial  association, 
involving  the  symbiotic  associations  between  N2-fixing  bacteria  and 
legumes has been elucidated in enormous detail. The important model 
legume Medicago truncatula is found to establish a symbiotic association 
with  Sinorhizobium  meliloti  for  nodulation.  Proteomic  approach  on 
M. truncatula nodules led to identification of a total of 377 plant-related 
proteins using 2D-LC/MS/MS (Larrainzar et al., 2007). Proteins identi-
fied belonged mainly to the functional groups linked to amino acid and 
protein  synthesis,  and  degradation.  Also,  proteins  with  role  in  N2 
assimilation  in  nodules  and  those  involved  in  the  pathway  of 
sulfur-containing  amino  acids  synthesis  were  observed.  Comparative 
proteomic analysis in different tissues of rice (root, leaf sheath and leaf) 
treated  with  S.  meliloti  showed  differential  proteins  with  function  in 
nine  different  categories  (Chi  et  al.,  2010).  The  interaction  caused 
up-regulation of photosynthesis-related proteins in the leaf sheath and 
leaf,  while  the  defense-related  proteins  were  upregulated  in  root, 
causing  an  overall  increase  in  rice  plant  growth.  In  another  previous 
report, the proteome of Bradyrhizobium japonicum bacteroids associating 
with soybean was analysed between 7 and 49 days after treatment to 
evaluate time-dependant modulation in the proteome content (Nomura 
et  al.,  2010).  Similarly,  comparison  of  root  phosphoproteome  of  the 
legume Lotus japonicus a few minutes after perception with symbiotic 
signaling  molecule 
conserved 
pathogen-associated peptide motif (flagellin flg 22) revealed not only 
signal  specific  but  also  large  overlapping  patterns  (Serna-Sanz  et  al., 
2011). 

(nodulation 

factor) 

and 

a 

Proteomic approach was also  adopted to study the interaction  be-
tween Arabidopsis thaliana and P. syringae DC3000 using distinct near- 
isogenic  lines  of  the  pathogen  (the  avirulence  gene  avrRpm1  and 

MicrobiologicalResearch242(2021)1265905A. Jain et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Table 2 
Some of the major proteins expressed during plant-pathogenic (P) or beneficial (B) microbe interaction, identified in plants using proteomic approach.  

Protein 

Host Plant 

Pathogen (P) or beneficial microbe (B) 

Bacteria 
Glutathione S-transferase 
Ascorbate peroxidase 
ATP synthase b subunit, chloroplast 
Transketolase 
RuBisCO large subunit 
Oxygen-evolving complex protein 2 
Enolase 
Ferredoxin-NADP reductase 
Peroxidase 
Hypothetical protein 
TPA: hypothetical protein 
Heat shock 70 kDa protein 
Glutathione S-transferase 

Fungi 
Receptor-like protein kinase 
Pathogenesis-related class 10 
β-1,3-glucanase 
Rubisco large subunit 
Thaumatin-like protein (PR-5) 
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 

dehydrogenase 

Resistance protein RPP8-like protein 
Ribonuclease-like PR-10a 

Malate dehydrogenase precursor 

Putative isoflavone reductase 
Short chain alcohol dehydrogenase 
Mannose-specific lectin 
GST 
Pathogenesis-related protein P2 
Defensin protein   
Peroxidase   
Chitinase   
Trypsin protein inhibitor 2 
Thioredoxin 
Pyruvate dehydrogenase 
Aconitate hydratase 
Adenosylhomocysteinase 
Phosphoglucomutase 

Virus 

PsbO 

Phenylalanine ammonia-lyase 
Mitochondrial chaperonin-60 
Aldolase C-1 
Mrna-binding protein 
Rab11 GTPase 
Ubiquitin extension protein 
Polyphenol oxidase precursor 
phosphoglycerate mutase 
thioredoxin peroxidase 

Lycopersicon 
hirsutum 

Clavibacter michiganensis ssp. michiganensis (P) 

Oryza sativa 

Xanthomaonas oryzae pv. oryzae(P) 

Solanum 
lycopersicum 

Ralstonia solanacearum(P) 

Zea mays 

Azospirillum brasilense(B) 

Arabidopsis 

Kosakonia radicincitans(B) 

O. sativa 

Magnaporthe grisea (P) 

O. sativa 

Rhizoctonia solani (P) 

Triticum aestivum 

Fusarium graminearum (P) 

Phaseolus vulgaris 

Trichoderma atroviride (B) and R. solani (P) 

Pisum sativum 
Messire 
P. sativum JI2480 

Gossypium 
barbadense 

Erysiphe pisi(P) 

Verticillium dahlia (P) 

Capsicum annum 

Phytophthora capsici (P) 

Cicer arietinum 

Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. ciceri Race 1 (FOC1)(P) 

P. sativum 

Bacillus subtilis + Trichoderma harzianum + Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
(B) and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum(P) 

P. sativum 

Pepper mild mottle virus (P) 

O. sativa 

Rice yellow mottle virus (P) 

C. annum 

Tobacco mosaic virus (P) 

S. lycopersicum 

Tomato yellow leaf curl virus (P) 

Catalase isozyme 1 

Cucurbito pepo 

Zucchini yellow mosaic virus(P) 

Accession 
number 

TC116034 
CAB58361 
M31464 
AK067452 
AB125345 
P29795 
P26300 
O04397 
Q9LWA2 
AAL01173 
DAA47715 
CAA94389 
NP_171791  

AAL87185 
AF416604 
BAA77785 
AAB02583 
CAA66278 

XP493811 

AAP82812 
AAK13030 

AAB99755 

AAL85023 
DT463387 
DW519682 
ES840989 
CAA41439 
AAL35366 
AAL35364 
CAA78844 
AT3G55440 
AT2G17420 
AT3G06483 
XP_003596988 
Q01781 
Q9SM60  

P14226 

P14717 
Q8H903 
Q42476 
DQ991047 
DQ975457 
DQ975458 
Q08296 
AAD24857 
CAC84143 

P48350 

References 

Coaker et al. (2004) 

Mahmood et al. 
(2006) 

Dahal et al. (2010) 

Faleiro et al. (2015) 

Witzel et al. (2017) 

Kim et al. (2004) 

Lee et al. (2006a,b) 

Zhou et al. (2006) 

Marra et al. (2006) 

Curto et al. (2006) 

Wang et al. (2011) 

Yeom et al. (2011) 

Chatterjee et al. 
(2014) 

Jain et al. (2015) 

Perez-Bueno et al. 
(2004) 

Delalande et al. 
(2005) 

Lee et al. (2006a,b) 

Moshe and Gorovits 
(2012) 

Nov´akov´a et al. 
(2015)  

DC3000 hrpA) (Jones et al., 2004). The P. syringae hrpA mutant cannot 
pass the effectors to the plant cells and thus fizzles in generating a hy-
persensitive  response.  Comparitive  protein  expression  profile  among 
treatments  along  with  control  plants  showed  consistent  variation  in 
glutathione S-transferases and peroxiredoxins. Using iTRAQ, Kaffarnik 
et al. (2009) observed alteration in extracellular proteins of A. thaliana 
as a result of infection with three different strains P. syringae. De-la-Pe˜na 
et  al.  (2008)  analysed  protein  secretion  of  symbiont  S.  meliloti  and 
phytopathogen  P.  syringae  DC3000  under  the  effect  of  root  exudates 
from A. thaliana  and M. sativa. It was observed that distinct group of 
proteins  were  secreted  depending  upon  the  associating  host  plant. 
Changes with regard to the ABC transporters were observed in both the 
cases, whereas modulation of superoxide dismutase was observed only 

in S. meliloti. 

Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) causes the second most severe 
disease of rice, the bacterial blight. Proteomic analysis of proteins from 
rice  leaves  inoculated  with  compatible  or  incompatible  Xoo  strains 
revealed  twenty  differential  protein  spots,  involved  in  energy,  meta-
bolism, defense, and protein synthesis Mahmood et al., 2006). Ten of 
these proteins were recorded to be specific to the compatible associa-
tion, such as ATP synthase, RuBisCO large subunit, and peroxiredoxin. 
Yeast two-hybrid approach was also used to design an interactome to 
discern the signaling pathway of Xa21 and other stress-linked proteins 
(Seo et al., 2011). Analysis of rice xylem sap infected with Xoo resulted 
in the recognition of 64 proteins which were found in all the treatments 
consisting mainly of known virulence-involved factors (Gonz´alez et al., 

MicrobiologicalResearch242(2021)1265906A. Jain et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

2012).  In  a  previous  study  differential  expression  of  274  genes  in 
resistant and susceptible genotypes of rice, as early as one hour after 
challenge with Xoo was shown using a transcriptomic approach (Grewal 
et al., 2012). 

In a proteomic study conducted by Gourion et al. (2006) in planta and 
in vitro cultivated cells of Methylobacterium extorquens, 45 proteins were 
seen to be more ample when growing as commensal growing on plant 
surfaces corresponding to cells grown on synthetic media. Out of these 
proteins some were of unknown function, some were metabolic proteins, 
and others were proteins playing role in stress response and the DNA 
protection protein Dps. The results also unravelled the involvement of a 
key regulator, PhyR, essential for phyllosphere colonization. Proteomic 
analysis of Lycopersicon hirsutum upon interaction with bacterial canker 
causing  pathogen  (Clavibacter  michiganensis  ssp.  michiganensis)  was 
revealed using 2DE and ESI-MS ⁄MS at 72 and 144 h post-challenge. The 
study reported 26 differentially regulated tomato proteins, 12 of which 
played crucial roles in defense and stress responses (Coaker et al., 2004). 
In  a  study  conducted  on  endophyte  Gluconacetobacter  diazo-
trophicus–sugarcane interaction, quantitative MS-based investigation by 
using  15N  labeling  of  host,  microbe,  and  co-cultures  were  performed 
(Lery et al., 2011). Out of 400 proteins analyzed, 78 were differentially 
regulated in plant-bacterium association with two distinct plant geno-
types and control cultures. Thirty bacterial proteins were also observed 
in the host roots; from these, nine of which were lured by plant signals. 
Recently, 2DE and MS were also used to analyze the differential protein 
profile of maize roots upon interaction with growth-promoting microbe 
Azospirillum brasilense 7 days post-inoculation (Faleiro et al., 2015). 

The  proteome  level  studies  not  only  provide  insights  to  comple-
mentary  mRNA  levels  for  studying  the  crosstalk  between  plants  and 
beneficial  microorganisms,  proteomics  together  with  metabolimics, 
directly  represent  phenotypic  expression  of  the  response  induced 
(Feussner and Polle, 2015). Comparative root proteome of Arabidopsis 
inoculated  and  uninoulated  with  plant  growth  promoting  bacteria 
Kosakonia  radicincitans  DSM  1665  was  studied  using  2D-gel  electro-
phoresis. A total of twelve differentially ample proteins were analysed 
by LC tandem MS, with most of them being associated to cellular stress 
response (Witzel et al., 2017). Recently, root proteomic profiles of the 
ethylene-insensitive  tomato  never  ripe  and  its  isogenic  wild-type  cv. 
Pearson  lines  treated  with  Bacillus  megaterium  or  Enterobacter  sp.  C7 
were  studied  (Ibort  et  al.,  2018).  Treatment  with  these  plant  growth 
promoting  bacteria  modified  amount  of  stress-linked  and  interaction 
proteins,  indicating  that  bacterial  treatment  can  affect  antioxidant 
content and phosphorus acquisition extent. Ethylene sensing is required 
for  proper  identification  of  B.  megaterium  and  growth  increment, 
whereas, Enterobacter C7 treatment enhanced phosphorus nutrition in 
both  the  lines,  independent  of  ethylene  responsiveness  (Ibort  et  al., 
2018). 

4.2. Plant-fungus associations 

While a large number of bacteria cause plant disease, the larger part 
of crop loss is caused by fungi. Proteomic approach has been used to 
delineate  the  interaction  between  plants  and  fungi  appertaining  to 
biotrophic and necrotrophic groups. Elucidating -mechanisms underly-
ing  resistance  using  proteome  approach  could  provide  deeper  under-
standing  into  the  plant-fungus  relationship  both  at  qualitative  and 
quantitative level and influence the application of these knowledge to 
produce  resistant  cultivars.  The  interaction  between  tomato  plants 
challenged  with  wilt  causing  fungi  Fusarium  oxysporum  was  studied 
using plant xylem sap. PR-5 protein was induced in both compatible and 
incompatible association, whereas, remaining PR proteins were found to 
be only regulated in compatible interplay (Rep et al., 2002). In a pre-
vious report on chickpea- F. oxysporum f.sp. ciceri Race1 (Foc1) inter-
action,  induction  of  redox  responsive  transcripts  was  observed  in 
controlling  downstream  defense  pathway  (Gupta  et  al.,  2013). 
Comparative chickpea root proteomics using 2D gel electrophoresis of 

susceptible and resistant varieties inoculated with Foc1 resulted in the 
identification  of  100  differentially  or  uniquely  expressed  proteins 
(Chatterjee et al., 2014). The function of numerous important proteins 
involved in metabolism, transport, signalling and defense was reported 
and their discrete expression in susceptible and resistant varieties was 
investigated. 

In another study involving interaction between A. thaliana-Plasmo-
diophora brassicae, protein from roots and stems of plants was inspected 
(Devos et al., 2006). Proteins with functions in cellular processes such as 
defense, metabolism, and differentiation displayed altered expression in 
challenged  plants  compared  to  unchallenged  controls.  Combined 
application of 2-D gel electrophoresis with LC and ESI-tandem MS were 
applied to analyze comparative proteome modulations in the needles of 
susceptible and resistant Pinus strobes in presence of Cronartium ribicola. 
Functional homologs of the leucine-rich repeat group in P. strobes were 
identified as possible molecular indicative for a hypersensitive response 
(Smith et al., 2006). Similarly, the association of Alternaria brassicae and 
different  cultivars  of  Brassica  napus  showed  modulation  in  proteins 
involved 
in  ROS  production  and  detoxification,  along  with 
auxin-signaling  responsive  protein,  indicating  the  possible  role  of  an 
auxin-mediated  ROS  signaling  involved  in  intervening  a  moderate 
resistance  in  a  resistant  variety  compared  to  the  susceptible  variety 
(Sharma et al., 2007). 

(cid:0)

+

+

The  proteomic  approach  revealed  a  resistance  response  of  pea  to 
biotrophic  fungi  Erysiphe  pisi  (Curto  et  al.,  2006).  MALDI-TOF/TOF 
study and database exploration showed 19 and 12 differential proteins 
in  infected  and  uninfected  Messire  leaves  and  JI2480  leaves,  respec-
tively. Proteins with role in photosynthesis, metabolism, energy gener-
ation,  stress  tolerance,  and  signalling  were  identified.  Zhang  et  al. 
(2013)  analyzed comparative  protein expression  among  near-isogenic 
lines  in  wheat  for  alleles  of  Fhb1,  an  important  FHB  resistance  gene, 
to find proteins pointing Fusarium graminearum tolerance of Fhb1, 72 h 
post-challenge.  Eight  proteins  were  observed  to  be  induced  or 
up-regulated in infected Fhb1
near-isogenic lines when compared with 
uninoculated  Fhb1
near-isogenic  line  whereas  nine  proteins  were 
+
either  induced  or  up-regulated  in  the  Fusarium-infected  Fhb1
near-isogenic  line  when  compared  with  Fusarium-inoculated  Fhb1
near-isogenic  line.  Differentially  expressed  proteins  were  mainly 
involved  in  avoiding  pathogenic  penetration,  photosynthesis,  and  en-
ergy  metabolism.  Phytophthora  sojae  is  an  agriculturally  important 
oomycete causing soybean root and stem rot. In a study conducted using 
2DE with subsequent MALDI-TOF-MS on soybean and this oomycete, 26 
proteins  were  found  to  be  significantly  altered  in  a  resistant  soybean 
genotype and 20 in a sensitive genotype (Zhang et al., 2011). Cochlio-
bolus  miyabeanus  is  a  causative  agent  of  brown–spot  disease  in  rice 
leaves.  A  proteomic  approach  was  employed  to  study  comparative 
proteomes of total and secreted proteins from the infected rice leaves 
using  2-DE  technique  after  PEG-fractionation  conjugated  with 
MALDI-TOF/TOF and nESI-LC–MS/MS leading to the recognition of 49 
differential proteins (Kim et al., 2014). The abundance of the proteins 
involved  in  the  Calvin  cycle  and  glycolysis  decreased  whereas  those 
involved in the TCA cycle, amino acids, and ethylene biosynthesis were 
found  to  increase.  Recently,  a  conserved  wall-associated  kinase  -like 
protein (Stb6) was reported to be involved in perceiving the pathogen 
effector  (AvrStb6)  and  conferring  resistance  to  Septoria  tritici(Kema 
et  al.,  2018).  Increased  knowledge  of  the  physiological  processes 
induced in plants upon fungal challenge may thus conceivably influence 
in having new and improved stress tolerance strategies. 

Analysis of the proteome of plant-pathogenic fungi association has 
received ample consideration. However, there exist very less proteome- 
based studies involving beneficial biocontrol and/or growth improving 
fungi. The proteomic approach has been used to study complex three- 
way association among bean plants, fungal pathogens (Botrytis cinerea, 
Rhizoctonia solani) and a biocontrol fungi Trichoderma atroviride (Marra 
et al., 2006). 2DE was used to compare proteomes from all the treat-
ments  viz.,  singly  treated,  dual  or  triple-  partner  combinations. 

MicrobiologicalResearch242(2021)1265907A. Jain et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Comparative  proteomics  revealed  PR-proteins  and  other  disease-liked 
proteins  to  be  induced  upon  interplay  between  different  treatments. 
Also, T. atroviride association proteomic analysis indicated homologies 
with a fungal hydrophobin, ABC transporters, and other proteins. Both 
the pathogens showed an up-regulation in virulence factors, like cyclo-
philins  during  the  interaction  with  only  plant  or  both  plant  and 
biocontrol  agent  T.  atroviride.  A  similar  study  involving  T.  harzianum 
interaction in roots of maize seedlings showed changes in carbohydrate 
metabolism using proteomics (Shoresh and Harman, 2008). A study by 
our group used beneficial microbes viz. P. aeruginosa, T. harzianum and 
Bacillus subtilis, which were recruited either singly or in dual or triple 
consortia in the pea rhizosphere to study differential proteome response 
they modulated upon necrotrophic fungi Sclerotinia sclerotiorum infec-
tion (Jain et al., 2015). Twenty-five different proteins were recognized 
by MALDI-TOF MS, which were involved in photosynthesis, respiration, 
phenylpropanoid metabolism, protein synthesis, stress regulation, car-
bohydrate  and  nitrogen  metabolism  and  disease/defense-related  pro-
cesses.  Proteomics  can  thus  be  used  to  feature  the  role  of  beneficial 
microbes  in  enhancing  resistance.  Even  though  there  has  been  a 
momentous improvement in decoding the in-depth  interplay between 
plant-fungi using proteomics, a lot of constitutional queries still remain 
unanswered. 

4.3. Plant-virus associations 

Viruses are the eventual parasites as they are non-cellular organisms 
and lifeless outside the host cell. They have small genomes encoding a 
restricted sum of proteins (Quirino et al., 2010). Proteomic studies on 
differential protein expression during virus infection, proteins involved 
in host-viral protein-protein interactions, can provide knowledge on the 
complex  and  diverse  molecular  interactions  between  host  plants  and 
attacking  viruses  (Alexander  and  Cilia,  2016).  Numerous  techniques 
have  been  applied  to  study  the  objective  of  virus-encoded  proteins, 
protein lured by virus challenge in plant and plant-virus associations. 

In a proteomic study conducted on maize and sugarcane mosaic virus 
(SCMV) interaction, quantitative 2D- DIGE from resistant and suscep-
tible varieties from SCMV challenged plants revealed 93 protein spots 
which  were  found  to  show  significant  expression  change.  Functional 
characterization of SCMV-induced proteins indicated proteins with role 
in  energy  and  carbon  metabolism,  stress  and  defense  responses,  and 
photosynthetic pathway (Wu et al., 2013). In a similar work, proteome 
analysis using 2DE coupled to DIGE was carried out to unravel expres-
sion  pattern  during  compatible  plant-cucumber  mosaic  virus  (CMV) 
association  in  wild  type  and  transgenic  tomato  leaves.  Overall  50 
differentially  regulated  proteins  were  recognized  by  nanoscale 
LC-ESI-ion trap-tandem MS, the majority of these proteins were found to 
be down-regulated upon CMV infection (Di Carli et al., 2010). 

Comparative 2DE of asymptomatic tomato fruits infected and unin-
fected  with  tobacco  mosaic  virus  (TMV)  reported  differential  protein 
expression  of  PR-proteins  and  antioxidant  proteins  indicating  their 
possible function in the protection against TMV challenge (Casado-Vela 
et  al.,  2006).  A  prominent  spot  of  TMV  coat  protein  observed  in 
asymptomatic fruits gels can thus be used as a crucial analysis technique 
for virus detection and characterization in virus-challenged fruits. Dif-
ferential 
endoplasmic 
reticulum-associated  molecular  chaperones  in  TMV  infected  Nicotiana 
glutinosa was studied using 2D-DIGE with MudPIT (Caplan et al., 2009). 
Another  study  using  proteomic  approaches  observed  modulation  of 
antioxidative proteins in leaf apoplast of peach inoculated with plum 
pox potyvirus (PPV) (Diaz-Vivancos et al., 2006). MALDI-TOF MS ana-
lyses of spots on 2D gels from infected peach leaves revealed four pro-
teins: one thaumatin-like and three mandelonitrile lyases. 

cytoplasmic 

regulation 

and 

of 

Brizard  et  al.  (2006)  used  size  exclusion  chromatography  to  elute 
virus-plant interactive protein aggregates from rice infected with Rice 
yellow  mottle  virus  (RYMV)  at  different  infection  stages.  Proteins 
confirmed  by  MS  were  mainly  proteins  with  role  in  plant  energy 

metabolism  probably  to  supply  energy  for  viral  replication,  plant  de-
fense and protein synthesis. Recently, the association between rice and 
Rice stripe virus (RSV) was demonstrated using an iTRAQ. Comparative 
protein quantification of challenged and unchallenged rice leaves was 
done  along  with  which  qRT-PCR  and  Northern  blot  analyses  (Wang 
et  al.,  2015).  A  total  of  681  differentially  expressed  proteins  were 
recognized, out of which 10 were involved in chlorophyll synthesis and 
3 in cell death. Thus, proteomics can also provide deep understanding 
into  the  mechanisms  hidden  for  disease  development  (Wang  et  al., 
2015). Recently, a plasmodesmata distinctive protein called NbEXPA1 
in  N.benthamiana,  was  found  to  be  downregulated  under  influence  of 
turnip mosaic virus infection. The study indicated the role of plasmo-
desmata  protein  in  promoting  potyviral  infection  (Park  et  al.,  2017). 
Application 
and 
high-sensitivity MS can further provide superlative understanding into 
the  comprehensive  impact  that  plants  and  viruses  can  have  on  each 
other. 

high-resolution 

electrophoresis 

2D-gel 

of 

5. Discussion 

Plant pathogens cause a huge loss to crop production worldwide, so 
it  is  important  to  have  detail  knowledge  about  strategies  adopted  by 
these attacking microorganisms to cause disease. They are highly ver-
satile in their infection mechanisms as they may affect different plants 
and different tissues. Their interaction depends on mutual recognition 
requiring  the  release  of  pathogenicity  factors  by  the  attacking  micro-
organism and defense mechanism used by the host. Complete knowledge 
of pathogenic factors, disease cycle is required for effective management 
of disease especially for using biocontrol agents. Bioinformatic tools will 
help  us  to  know  the  gene  product  involved  in  a  particular  plant- 
beneficial microorganism and pathogen involved. Also, if omics study 
is coupled with targeted mutagenesis or transgenic studies that will help 
us in better understanding the molecular basis of host-pathogen cross- 
talks. 

Proteins are structural and functional components in all living cells. 
Studies at proteome level can ideally provide information about func-
tional molecules in the cell and changes induced in expression patterns 
of proteins in various states and under different stresses (Rakwal and 
Agrawal, 2003; Jain et al., 2015). Proteomics help us to identify not only 
the gene products  with pivotal functions as pathogenic  and virulence 
factors in the pathogens but also the ones with a decisive role in defense 
and  stress  regulation  in  plants  (Fern´andez  and  Novo,  2011).  This 
approach will surely help us in searching of key crucial protein targets 
and in the formation of disease management strategies, which will open 
new modes for early disease detection and ensure crop safety. Taking 
into  consideration  the  plethora  of  proteins  induced  by  beneficial  mi-
croorganisms or modulated by biotic stresses, it becomes important to 
consolidate this information into easily available data so that the current 
knowledge along with the plentiful of available markers known can be 
analyzed  for  their  role  in  symbiotic  relationships,  pathogenesis, 
signaling, and resistance to stress. 

Most  of  the  proteins  functioning  in  plant-microbe  association  are 
those  which  are  involved  in  inducing  resistance,  enhancing  defense, 
carbohydrate metabolism, and those providing redox homeostasis. But 
the key players in such complex interactions are generally expressed in 
low  abundance,  detection  of  their  presence  becomes  difficult  using 
proteomic tools. Another drawback of proteomics is that such studies 
need protein to be identified using peptide mass fingerprinting which 
largely  depends  on  sequence  databases  accessible  for  public  users. 
Therefore,  less  studied  associations  require  de  novo  sequencing  for 
identification  making  the  analysis  part  difficult  to  perform.  These 
technical  limitations  are  required  to  be  overcome  in  the  future  for 
attaining deeper insights into plant-microbe interactions. 

Proteomic  analysis  have  been  executed  in  order  to  unravel  plant- 
microbe interplay, induction of induced systemic response in plants by 
the  beneficial  microbe,  pathogenic  and  virulence  factors  involved  in 

MicrobiologicalResearch242(2021)1265908A. Jain et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

disease management (Mathesius, 2009; Fern´andez and Novo, 2010; Jain 
et al., 2015). Studies reviewed in the previous section indicate compli-
cated cellular networks that exist in numerous plant-pathogen interac-
tion and plant-beneficial microbe interaction. System-level knowledge 
of biotic stress reaction and the effect of applied biocontrol agents will 
help us to pinpoint promising new targets for the improvement of dis-
ease  tolerance.  Implementation  of  proteomics,  metaproteomics,  and 
secretomics can also permit functional analysis of plant-associated mi-
crobial associations (Khatabi et al., 2019). Overall, proteomics coupled 
to bioinformatics tools can provide alluring knowledge to develop an 
comprehensive knowledge of complicated association involved among 
plant and microbes. 

6. Conclusion 

For  understanding  the  cellular  processes  underpinning  plant- 
microbe  association  there  is  no  alternative  than  to  study  proteins  as 
they are directly liable for all cellular action. The technical advances in 
mass  spectrometry,  bioinformatic  tools  and  increasing  number  of 
sequenced genome allow for comparatively simpler protein identifica-
tion.  An  increasing  number  of  sequenced  genomes  will  have  an 
encouraging  effect  on  protein  identification  permitting  peptide  mass 
fingerprinting to be applied on more plants, pathogens and/or beneficial 
microbes.  The  amalgamation  of  proteomics  with  data  produced  from 
genomics, classical knowledge of plant pathology and advancement in 
genetic  engineering  technique  eg.  CRISPR-Cas  system  will  ultimately 
contribute to the development of new disease-resistant varieties or crops 
treated with beneficial microorganisms showing enhanced resistance. In 
the current scheme, the use of comparative proteomics to analyse plant- 
microbe interplay will become the most popular choice for researchers 
all over the world. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Akansha  Jain:  Writing  -  review  &  editing.  Harikesh  Bahadur 
Singh:  Writing  -  review  &  editing.  Sampa  Das:  Writing  -  review  & 
editing. 

Acknowledgements 

AJ is grateful to Department of Science and Technology, India, for 
financial  assistance  under  DST  Women  Scientist-WOS-A  Scheme  (SR/ 
WOS-A/LS-377/2018).  SD  acknowledges  Indian  National  Science 
Academy for providing Senior Scientist fellowship. 

References 

Aebersold, R., Mann, M., 2003. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Nature 422 (6928), 

198–207. 

Agrawal, G.K., Sarkar, A., Righetti, P.G., Pedreschi, R., Carpentier, S., Wang, T., 
Barkla, B.J., Kohli, A., Ndimba, B.K., Bykova, N.V., Rampitsch, C., Zolla, L., 
Rafudeen, M.F., Cramer, R., Bindschedler, L.V., Tsakirpaloglou, N., Ndimba, R.J., 
Farrant, J.M., Renaut, J., Job, D., Kikuchi, S., Rakwal, R., 2013. A decade of plant 
proteomics and mass spectrometry: translation of technical advancements to food 
security and safety issues. Mass Spectrom. Rev. 32 (5), 335–365. 

Alexander, M.M., Cilia, M., 2016. A molecular tug-of-war: global plant proteome changes 

during viral infection. Curr. Plant Biol. 5, 13–24. 

Bindschedler, L.V., Cramer, R., 2011. Quantitative plant proteomics. Proteomics 11, 

756–775. https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201000426. 

Boller, T., Felix, G., 2009. A renaissance of elicitors: perception of microbe-associated 

molecular patterns and danger signals by pattern-recognition receptors. Annu. Rev. 
Plant Biol. 60, 379–406. 

Bond, A.E., Row, P.E., Dudley, E., 2011. Post-translation modification of proteins; 

methodologies and applications in plant sciences. Phytochemistry 72, 975–996. 

Brizard, J.P., Carapito, C., Delalande, F., Van Dorsselaer, A., Brugidou, C., 2006. 

Proteome analysis of plant-virus interactome, comprehensive data for virus 
multiplication inside their hosts. Mol. Cell Proteom. 5, 2279–2297. 

Caplan, J.L., Zhu, X., Mamillapalli, P., Marathe, R., Anandalakshmi, R., Dinesh-Kumar, S. 
P., 2009. Induced ER chaperones regulate a receptor-like kinase to mediate antiviral 
innate immune response in plants. Cell Host Microbe 6, 457–469. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.chom.2009.10.005. 

Casado-Vela, J., Sell´es, S., Martínez, R.B., 2006. Proteomic analysis of tobacco mosaic 
virus-infected tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum M.) fruits and detection of viral coat 
protein. Proteom. Suppl. 1, S196–206. 

Chait, B.T., 2011. Mass spectrometry in the postgenomic era. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 80, 

239–246. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biochem-110810-095744. 

Chatterjee, M., Gupta, S., Bhar, A., Chakraborto, D., Das, S., 2014. Analysis of root 
proteome unravels differential molecular responses during compatible and 
incompatible interaction between chickpea Cicer arietinum L. and Fusarium 
oxysporum f. sp. ciceri Race1 Foc1. BMC Genom. 15, 949. 

Chi, F.M., Yang, P., Han, F., Jing, Y., Shen, S., 2010. Proteomic analysis of rice seedlings 

infected by Sinorhizobium meliloti 1021. Proteomics 109, 1861–1874. 

Coaker, G.L., Willard, B., Kinter, M., Stockinger, E.J., Francis, D.M., 2004. Proteomic 
analysis of resistance mediated by Rcm 2.0 and Rcm 5.1, two loci controlling 
resistance to bacterial canker of tomato. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 17, 
1019–1028. 

Costa, T.R.D., Felisberto-Rodrigues, Meir, A., Redzej, A., Trokter, M., Waksman, G., 
2015. Secretion systems in Gram-negative bacteria, structural and mechanistic 
insights. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 13, 343–359. 

Curto, M., Camafeita, E., Lopez, J.A., Maldonado, A.M., Rubiales, D., Jorrín, J.V., 2006. 
A proteomic approach to study pea Pisum sativum responses to powdery mildew 
Erysiphe pisi. Proteomics 6, S163–174. 

Dahal, D., Pich, A., Braun, H.P., Wydra, K., 2010. Analysis of cell wall proteins regulated 
in stem of susceptible and resistant tomato species after inoculation with Ralstonia 
solanacearum, a proteomic approach. Plant Mol. Biol. 73, 643–658. 

Delalande, F., Carapito, C., Brizard, J.P., Brugidou, C., Van Dorsselaer, A., 2005. 

Multigenic families and proteomics, extended protein characterization as a tool for 
paralog gene identification. Proteomics 5, 450–460. 

De-La-Pe˜na, C., Lei, Z., Watson, B.S., Sumner, L.W., Vivanco, J.M., 2008. Root-microbe 
communication through protein secretion. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 25247–25255. 
Devos, S., Laukens, K., Deckers, P., Van Der Straeten, D., Beeckman, T., Inze, D., Van 

Onckelen, H., Witters, E., Prinsen, E., 2006. A hormone and proteome approach to 
picturing the initial metabolic events during Plasmodiophora brassicae infection on 
Arabidopsis. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 19, 1431–1443. 

Di, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhang, L., Tao, T., Lu, H., 2017. MdFDIA, A mass defect based four-plex 
data-independent acquisition strategy for proteome quantification. Anal. Chem. 919, 
10248–10255. 

Di Carli, M., Villani, M.E., Bianco, L., Lombardi, R., Perrotta, G., Benvenuto, E., 

Donini, M., 2010. Proteomic analysis of the plant-virus interaction in cucumber 
mosaic virus CMV. Resistant transgenic tomato. J. Proteome Res. 911, 5684–5697. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/pr100487x. 

Diaz-Vivancos, P., Rubio, M., Mesonero, V., Periago, P.M., Barcelo, A.R., Martinez- 

Gomez, P., Hernandez, J.A., 2006. The apoplastic antioxidant system in Prunus, 
response to long-term plum pox virus infection. J. Exp. Bot. 57, 3813–3824. 
Doehlemann, G., Hemetsberger, C., 2013. Apoplastic immunity and its suppression by 

filamentous plant pathogens. New Phytol. 198, 1001–1016. 

Emmett, M.R., Caprioli, R.M., 1994. Micro-electrospray mass spectrometry, ultra-high- 
sensitivity analysis of peptides and proteins. J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 5, 605–613. 
Faleiro, A.C., Neto, P.A.V., de Souza, T.V., Santos, M., Arisi, A.C.M., 2015. Microscopic 

and proteomic analysis of Zea mays roots P30F53 variety. Inoculated with 
Azospirillum brasilense strain FP2. J. Crop Sci. Biotechnol. 18 (2), 63–71. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s12892-014-0061-x. 

Fenn, J.B., Mann, M., Meng, C.K., Wong, S.F., Whitehouse, C.M., 1989. Electrospray 
ionization for mass spectrometry of large biomolecules. Science 246, 64–71. 
Fern´andez, R.G., Novo, J.V.J., 2010. Proteomics of fungal plant pathogens, the case of 
Botrytis cinerea. In: Vilas, A.M. (Ed.), Current Research, Technology and Education 
Topics in Applied Microbiology and Microbial Biotechnology, pp. 205–217. 
Fern´andez, R.G., Novo, J.V.J., 2011. Contribution of proteomics to the study of plant 

pathogenic fungi. J. Proteome Res. 111, 3–16. 

Feussner, I., Polle, A., 2015. What the transcriptome does not tell - proteomics and 

metabolomics are closer to the plants’ patho-phenotype. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 26, 
26–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2015.05.023. 

Fu, Z.Q., Guo, M., Jeong, B.R., Tian, F., Elthon, T.E., Cerny, R.L., Staiger, D., Alfano, J.R., 
2007. A type III effector ADP-ribosylates RNA-binding proteins and quells plant 
immunity. Nature 447, 284–288. 

Gerber, I.B., Laukens, K., Witters, E., Dubery, I.A., 2006. Lipopolysaccharide-responsive 

phosphoproteins in Nicotiana tabacum cells. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 44, 369–379. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2006.06.01. 

Gerber, I.B., Laukens, K., De Vijlder, T., Witters, E., Dubery, I.A., 2008. Proteomic 

profiling of cellular targets of lipopolysaccharide-induced signalling in Nicotiana 
tabacum BY-2 cells. Biochem. Biophys. Acta 1784, 1750–1762. 

Gimenez-Ibanez, S., Solano, R., 2013. Nuclear jasmonate and salicylate signaling and 
crosstalk in defense against pathogens. Front. Plant Sci. 4, 72. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fpls.2013.00072. 

Gonz´alez, J.F., Degrassi, G.D., Devescovi, G., Vleesschauwer, D.D., H¨ofte, M., Myers, M. 
P., Venturi, V., 2012. A proteomic study of Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae in rice 
xylem sap. J. Proteom. 75, 5911–5919. 

Gourion, B., Rossignol, M., Vorholt, J.A., 2006. A proteomic study of Methylobacterium 
extorquensreveals a novel type of response regulator essential for epiphytic growth. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103, 13186–13191. 

Granlund, I., Hall, M., Schr¨oder, W.P., 2009. Difference Gel Electrophoresis DIGE. eLS. 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470015902. 
a0021881 http,//www.els.net.  

Grewal, R.K., Gupta, S., Das, S., 2012. Xanthomonas oryzae pv oryzae triggers immediate 

transcriptomic modulations in rice. BMC Genom. 13, 49. 

MicrobiologicalResearch242(2021)1265909A. Jain et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Griffin, P.R., Coffman, J.A., Hood, L.E., Yates, J.R., 1991. Structural analysis of proteins 

Lee, B.J., Kwon, S.J., Kim, S.K., Kim, K.J., Park, C.J., Kim, Y.J., Park, O.K., Paek, K.H., 

by capillary HPLC electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 
Ion Process. 111, 131–149. 

Gupta, S., Bhar, A., Chatterjee, M., Das, S., 2013. Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. ciceri Race 1 
induced redox state alterations are coupled to downstream defense signaling in root 
tissues of chickpea Cicer arietinum L. PLoS One 89, e73163. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
journal.pone.0073163. 

Gygi, S.P., Aebersold, R., 2000. Mass spectrometry and proteomics. Curr. Opin. Chem. 

Biol. 4, 489–494. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1367-593100.00121. 

Huang, H., Shukla, H.D., Wu, C., Saxena, S., 2007. Challenges and solutions in 

proteomics. Curr. Genom. 8, 21–28. 

Ibort, P., Imai, H., Uemura, M., Aroca, R., 2018. Proteomic analysis reveals that tomato 
interaction with plant growth promoting bacteria is highly determined by ethylene 
perception. J. Plant Physiol. 220, 43–59. 

Jain, A., Singh, S., Sarma, B.K., Singh, H.B., 2012. Microbial consortium mediated 

reprogramming of defense network in pea to enhance tolerance against Sclerotinia 
sclerotiorum. J. Appl. Microbiol. 1123, 537–550. 

Jain, A., Singh, A., Singh, S., Singh, H.B., 2013a. Microbial consortium-induced changes 
in oxidative stress markers in pea plants challenged with Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. 
J. Plant Growth Regul. 32, 388–398. 

Jain, A., Singh, A., Singh, B.N., Singh, S., Upadhyay, R.S., Sarma, B.K., Singh, H.B., 

2013b. Biotic stress management in agricultural crops using microbial consortium. 
In: Maheshwari, D.K. (Ed.), Bacteria in Agrobiology, Disease Management. Springer, 
Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 427–448. 

Jain, A., Singh, A., Singh, S., Singh, H.B., 2015. Comparative proteomics analysis in pea 
treated with microbial consortium of beneficial microbes reveals changes in protein 
network to enhance resistance against Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. J. Plant Physiol. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jplph.2015.05.004. 

Jain, A., Chakrobarty, J., Das, S., 2020. Underlying mechanism of plant –microbe 

crosstalk in shaping microbial ecology of the rhizosphere. Acta Physiol. Plant. 42, 8. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11738-019-3000-0. 

Jayaraman, D., Forshey, K.L., Grimsrud, P.A., Ane, J.M., 2012. Leveraging proteomics to 
understand plant-microbe interactions. Front. Plant Sci. 3, 44. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fpls.2012.00044. 

Jiang, J., Gai, Z., Wang, Y., Fan, K., Sun, L., Wang, H., Ding, Z., 2018. Comprehensive 
proteome analyses of lysine acetylation in tea leaves by sensing nitrogen nutrition. 
BMC Genom. 19 (1), 840. 

Jones, J.D., Dangl, J.L., 2006. The plant immune system. Nature 444 (7117), 323–329. 
Jones, A.M.E., Thomas, V., Truman, B., Lilley, K., Mansfield, J., Grant, M., 2004. Specific 

changes in the Arabidopsis proteome in response to bacterial challenge, 
differentiating basal and R-gene mediated resistance. Phytochemistry 65, 
1805–1816. 

2006b. Functional study of hot pepper 26S proteasome subunit RPN7 induced by 
tobacco mosaic virus from nuclear proteome analysis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. 
Commun. 351, 405–411. 

Lery, L.M., Hemerly, A.S., Nogueira, E.M., von Krüger, W.M., Bisch, P.M., 2011. 

Quantitative proteomic analysis of the interaction between the endophytic plant- 
growth-promoting bacterium Gluconacetobacter diazotrophicus and sugarcane. Mol. 
Plant Microbe Interact. 24, 562–576. 

Liu, C., Li, Z., Xing, J., Yang, J., Wang, Z., Zhang, H., Chen, D., Peng, Y.L., Chen, X.L., 

2018. Global analysis of sumoylation function reveals novel insights into 
development and appressorium-mediated infection of the rice blast fungus. New 
Phytol. 2193, 1031–1047. 

Liu, Y., Lu, S., Liu, K., Wang, K., Huang, L., Guo, L., 2019. Proteomics, a powerful tool to 
study plant responses to biotic stress. Plant Methods 15, 135. https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s13007-019-0515-0518. 

Mahmood, T., Jan, A., Kakishima, M., Komatsu, S., 2006. Proteomic analysis of bacterial- 
blight defense responsive proteins in rice leaf blades. Proteomics 6, 6053–6065. 
Mann, M., Hendrickson, R.C., Pandey, A., 2001. Analysis of proteins and proteomes by 
mass spectrometry. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 70, 437–473. https://doi.org/10.1146/ 
annurev.biochem.70.1.437. 

Marra, R., Ambrosino, P., Carbone, V., Vinale, F., Woo, S.L., Ruocco, M., Ciliento, R., 

Lanzuise, S., Ferraioli, S., Soriente, I., Gigante, S., Turr`a, D., Fogliano, V., Scala, F., 
Lorito, M., 2006. Study of the three-way interaction between Trichoderma atroviride, 
plant and fungal pathogens by using a proteomic approach. Curr. Gene 50, 307–321. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00294-006-0091-0. 

Mathesius, U., 2009. Comparative proteomic studies of root-microbe interactions. 
J. Proteom. 72, 353–366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2008.12.006. 
Mcllwain, S., Page, D., Huttlin, E.L., Sussman, M.R., 2008. Matching isotopic 

distributions from metabolically labelled samples. Bioinformatics 24, i339–i347. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btn190. 

Mehta, A., Brasileiro, A.C.M., Souza, D.S.L., Romano, E., Campos, M.A., Grossi-de-S´a, M. 

F., Silva, M.S., Franco, O.L., Fragoso, R.R., Bevitori, R., Rocha, T.L., 2008. 
Plant–pathogen interactions, what is proteomics telling us? FEBS J. 275 (15), 
3731–3746. 

Meksiriporn, B., Ludwicki, M.B., Stephens, E.A., Jiang, A., Lee, H.C., Waraho- 

Zhmayev, D., Kummer, L., Brandl, F., Pluckthun, A., DeLisa, M.P., 2019. A survival 
selection strategy for engineering synthetic binding proteins that specifically 
recognize post-translationally phosphorylated proteins. Nat. Commun. 10 (1), 1830. 
Merchant, M., Weinberger, S.R., 2000. Recent advancements in surface-enhanced laser 

desorption/ionization-time of flight-mass spectrometry. Electrophoresis 21, 
1164–1177. 

Moshe, A., Gorovits, R., 2012. Virus-induced aggregates in infected cells. Viruses 4, 

Jones, A.M., Monaghan, J., Ntoukakis, V., 2013. Editorial, mechanisms regulating 

2218–2232. 

immunity in plants. Front. Plant Sci. 4. 

Kaffarnik, F.A., Jones, A.M., Rathjen, J.P., Peck, S.C., 2009. Effector proteins of the 

bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae alter the extracellular proteome of the host 
plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol. Cell Proteom. 8, 145–156. 

Karas, M., Hillenkamp, F., 1988. Laser desorption ionization of proteins with molecular 

masses exceeding 10,000 Da. Anal. Chem. 60, 2299–3011. 

Kav, N., Srivastava, S., Yajima, W., Sharma, N., 2007. Application of proteomics to 

investigate plant-microbe interactions. Curr. Proteom. 4, 28–43. https://doi.org/ 
10.2174/15701640778138735. 

Keller, A., Nesvizhskii, A.I., Kolker, E., Aebersold, R., 2002. Empirical statistical model to 
estimate the accuracy of peptide identifications made by MS/MS and database 
search. Anal. Chem. 7420, 5383–5392. 

Kema, G.H.J., Mirzadi Gohari, A., Aouini, L., Gibriel, H.A.Y., Ware, S.B., van den 
Bosch, F., Manning-Smith, R., Alonso-Chavez, V., Helps, J., Ben M’Barek, S., 
Mehrabi, R., Diaz-Trujillo, C., Zamani, E., Schouten, H.J., van der Lee, T.A.J., 
Waalwijk, C., de Waard, M.A., de Wit, P., Verstappen, E.C.P., Thomma, B., Meijer, H. 
J.G., Seidl, M.F., 2018. Stress and sexual reproduction affect the dynamics of the 
wheat pathogen effector AvrStb6 and strobilurin resistance. Nat. Genet. 503, 
375–380. 

Khatabi, B., Gharechahi, J., Ghaffari, M.R., Liu, D., Haynes, P.A., McKay, M.J., 

Mirzaei, M., Salekdeh, G.H., 2019. Plant-microbe symbiosis, what has proteomics 
taught us? Proteomics 196, e1800105. 

Kim, S.T., Kim, S.G., Hwang, D.H., Kang, S.Y., Kim, H.J., Lee, B.H., Lee, J.J., Kang, K.Y., 
2004. Proteomic analysis of pathogen-responsive proteins from rice leaves induced 
by rice blast fungus, Magnaporthe grisea. Proteomics 4, 3569–3578. 

Kim, J.K., Wu, J., Kwon, S.J., Oh, H., Lee, S.E., Kim, S.G., 2014. Proteomics of rice and 
Cochliobolus miyabeanus fungal interaction, Insight into proteins at intracellular and 
extracellular spaces. Proteomics 1420. https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201400066. 

Knief, C., Delmotte, N., Vorholt, J., 2011. Bacterial adaptation to life in association with 
plants - a proteomic perspective from culture to in situ conditions. Proteomics 11, 
1–20. 

Kristjansdottir, K., Wolfgeher, D., Lucius, N., Angulo, D.S., Kron, S.J., 2008. 

Phosphoprotein profiling by PA-GeLC-MS/MS. J. Proteome Res. 77, 2812–2824. 
Larrainzar, E., Wienkoop, S., Weckwerth, W., Ladrera, R., Arrese-Igor, C., Gonz´alez, E.M., 
2007. Medicago truncatula root nodule proteome analysis reveals differential plant 
and bacteroid responses to drought stress. Plant Physiol. 1443, 1495–1507. https:// 
doi.org/10.1104/pp.107.101618. 

Le Sage, V., Cinti, A., Mouland, A.J., 2016. Proximity-dependent biotinylation for 

identification of interacting proteins. Curr. Protoc. Cell Biol. 73, 17191–171912. 
Lee, J., Bricker, T.M., Lefevre, M., Pinson, S.R.M., Oard, J.H., 2006a. Proteomic and 

genetic approaches to identifying defence-related proteins in rice challenged with 
the fungal pathogen Rhizoctonia solani. Mol. Plant Pathol. 75, 405–416. 

Narayanan, A., Jacobson, M.P., 2009. Computational studies of protein regulation by 

post-translational phosphorylation. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 19, 156–163. 
Nesvizhskii, A.I., Keller, A., Kolker, E., Aebersold, R., 2003. A statistical model for 

identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 75, 4646–4658. 
Nomura, K., Debroy, S., Lee, Y.H., Pumplin, N., Jones, J., He, S.Y., 2006. A bacterial 
virulence protein suppresses host innate immunity to cause plant disease. Science 
313, 220–223. 

Nomura, M., Arunothayanan, H., Dao, T.V., Le, H.T.P., Takakazu Kaneko, T., Sato, S., 

Tabata, S., Tajima, S., 2010. Differential protein profiles of Bradyrhizobium japonicum 
USDA110 bacteroid during soybean nodule development. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr. 56, 
579–590. 

Nov´akov´a, S., Flores-Ramírez, G., Glasa, M., Danchenko, M., Fiala, R., Skultety, L., 2015. 
Partially resistant Cucurbita pepo showed late onset of the Zucchini yellow mosaic 
virus infection due to rapid activation of defense mechanisms as compared to 
susceptible cultivar. Front. Plant Sci. 6, 263. 

Ong, S.E., Blagoev, B., Kratchmarova, I., Kristensen, D.B., Steen, H., Pandey, A., 

Mann, M., 2002. Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture, SILAC, as a 
simple and accurate approach to expression proteomics. Mol. Cell Proteom. 1, 
376–386. https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M200025-MCP200. 

Park, C.J., Caddell, D.F., Ronald, P.C., 2012. Protein phosphorylation in plant immunity, 
insights into the regulation of pattern recognition receptor-mediated signaling. 
Front. Plant Sci. 3. 

Park, S.H., Li, F., Renaud, J., Shen, W., Li, Y., Guo, L., Cui, H., Sumarah, M., Wang, A., 
2017. NbEXPA1, an alpha-expansin, is plasmodesmata-specific and a novel host 
factor for potyviral infection. Plant J. 925, 846–861. 

Patel, J.S., Sarma, B.K., Singh, H.B., Upadhyay, R.S., Kharwar, R.N., Ahmed, M., 2016. 
Pseudomonas fluorescens and Trichoderma asperellum enhance expression of Gα 
subunits of the pea heterotrimeric G-protein during Erysiphe pisi infection. Front. 
Plant Sci. 6, 1206. 

Pel, M.J., Pieterse, C.M., 2013. Microbial recognition and evasion of host immunity. 

J. Exp. Bot. 64, 1237–1248. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/ers262. 

Perez-Bueno, M.L., Rahoutei, J., Sajnani, C., Garcia-Luque, I., Baron, M., 2004. 

Proteomic analysis of the oxygen evolving complex of photosystem II under biotic 
stress, studies on Nicotiana benthamiana infected with tobamoviruses. Proteomics 4, 
418–425. 

Pieterse, C.M., van der Does, D., Zamioudis, C., Leon-Reyes, A., van Wees, S.C., 2012. 

Hormonal modulation of plant immunity. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 28, 28.1–28.33. 
Quirino, B.F., Candido, E.S., Campos, P.F., Franco, O.L., Krüger, R.H., 2010. Proteomic 
approaches to study plant–pathogen interactions. Phytochemistry 71, 351–362. 
Rakwal, R., Agrawal, G.K., 2003. Rice proteomics, current status and future perspectives. 

Electrophoresis 24, 3378–3388. 

Rep, M., Dekker, H.L., Vossen, J.H., de Boer, A.D., Houterman, P.M., Speijer, D., Back, J. 
W., de Koster, C.G., Cornelissen, B.J., 2002. Mass spectrometric identification of 

MicrobiologicalResearch242(2021)12659010A. Jain et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

isoforms of PR proteins in xylem sap of fungus-infected tomato. Plant Physiol. 130, 
904–917. 

Riley, N.M., Hebert, A.S., Westphall, M.S., Coon, J.J., 2019. Capturing site-specific 

heterogeneity with large-scale N-glycoproteome analysis. Nat. Commun. 10 (1), 
1311. 

Robert-Seilaniantz, A., MacLean, D., Jikumaru, Y., Hill, L., Yamaguchi, S., Kamiya, Y., 
Jones, J.D.G., 2011. The microRNA miR393 re-directs secondary metabolite 
biosynthesis away from camalexin and towards glucosinolates. Plant J. 67, 218–231. 

Roe, M.R., Griffin, T.J., 2006. Gel-free mass spectrometry-based high throughput 
proteomics, tools for studying biological response of proteins and proteomes. 
Proteomics 6, 4678–4687. https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200500876. 

Rytz, T.C., Miller, M.J., McLoughlin, F., Augustine, R.C., Marshall, R.S., Juan, Y.T., 
Charng, Y.Y., Scalf, M., Smith, L.M., Vierstra, R.D., 2018. SUMOylome profiling 
reveals a diverse array of nuclear targets modified by the SUMO ligase SIZ1 during 
heat stress. Plant Cell 30 (5), 1077–1099. 

Scheler, C., Durner, J., Astier, J., 2013. Nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species in plant 
biotic interactions. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 16, 534–539. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
pbi.2013.06.020. 

Seo, Y.S., Chern, M., Bartley, L.E., Han, M., Jung, K.H., Lee, I., Walia, H., Richter, T., 

Xu, X., Cao, P., 2011. Towards establishment of a rice stress response interactome. 
PLoS Genet. 7, e1002020. 

Serna-Sanz, A., Parniske, M., Peck, S.C., 2011. Phosphoproteome analysis of Lotus 

japonicusroots reveals shared and distinct components of symbiosis and defense. Mol. 
Plant Microbe Interact. 24, 932–937. https://doi.org/10.1094/MPMI-09-10-0222. 

Sharma, N., Rahman, M.H., Strelkov, S., Thiagarajah, M., Bansal, V.K., Kav, N.N.V., 
2007. Proteome-level changes in two brassica napus lines exhibiting differential 
responses to the fungal pathogen Alternaria brassicae. Plant Sci. 172, 95–110. 
Shoresh, M., Harman, G.E., 2008. The molecular basis of shoot responses of maize 
seedlings to Trichoderma harzianum T22 inoculation of the root, a proteomic 
approach. Plant Physiol. 147, 2147–2163. 

Sidoli, S., Lin, S., Xiong, L., Bhanu, N.V., Karch, K.R., Johansen, E., Hunter, C., Mollah, S., 
Garcia, B.A., 2015. Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra 
SWATH. Analysis for characterization and quantification of histone post- 
translational modifications. Mol. Cell Proteom. 149, 2420–2428. https://doi.org/ 
10.1074/mcp.O114.046102. 

Smith, J.A., Blanchette, R.A., Burnes, T.A., Jacobs, J.J., Higgins, L., Witthuhn, B.A., 

David, A.J., Gillman, J.H., 2006. Proteomic comparison of needles from blister rust- 
resistant and susceptible Pinus strobes seedlings reveals upregulation of putative 
disease resistance proteins. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 19, 150–160. 

Sperschneider, J., Catanzariti, A.M., DeBoer, K., Petre, B., Gardiner, D.M., Singh, K.B., 
Dodds, P.N., Taylor, J.M., 2017. LOCALIZER, subcellular localization prediction of 
both plant and effector proteins in the plant cell. Sci. Rep. 7, 44598. 

Syka, J.E., Coon, J.J., Schroeder, M.J., Shabanowitz, J., Hunt, D.F., 2004. Peptide and 
protein sequence analysis by electron transfer dissociation mass spectrometry. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 101, 9528–9533. 

Thingholm, T.E., Larsen, M.R., 2016. Sequential elution from IMAC (SIMAC): an efficient 
method for enrichment and separation of mono- and multi-phosphorylated peptides. 
In: von Stechow, L. (Ed.), Phospho-Proteomics. Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 
1355. Springer, New York, NY. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-3049-4_10.  

Torres, M.A., 2010. ROS in biotic interactions. Physiol. Plant. 138, 414–429. 
Walton, A., Stes, E., Cybulski, N., Van Bel, M., Inigo, S., Durand, A.N., Timmerman, E., 
Heyman, J., Pauwels, L., De Veylder, L., Goossens, A., De Smet, I., Coppens, F., 
Goormachtig, S., Gevaert, K., 2016. It’s time for some “site”-seeing: novel tools to 
monitor the ubiquitin landscape in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 28 (1), 6–16. 
Wang, Y., Feechan, A., Yun, B., Shafiei, R., Hofmann, A., Taylor, P., Xue, P., Yang, F., 

Xie, Z., Pallas, J.A., Chu, C., Loake, G.J., 2009. S-Nitrosylation of AtSABP3 
antagonizes the expression of plant immunity. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 2131–2137. 
https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.012617. 

Wang, F.X., Ma, Y.P., Yang, C.L., Zhao, P.M., Yao, Y., Jian, G.L., Luo, Y.M., Xia, G.X., 
2011. Proteomic analysis of the sea-island cotton roots infected by wilt pathogen 
Verticillium dahlia. Proteomics 11, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201100062. 
Wang, B., Hajano, J., Ren, Y., Chuantao, Lu., Wang, X., 2015. iTRAQ-based quantitative 
proteomics analysis of rice leaves infected by Rice stripe virus reveals several 
proteins involved in symptom formation. Virol. J. 12, 99. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s12985-015-0328-y. 

Washburn, M.P., Wolters, D., Yates IIIrd, J.R., 2001. Large-scale analysis of the yeast 
proteome by multidimensional protein identification technology. Nat. Biotechnol. 
19, 242–247. 

Withers, J., Dong, X., 2017. Post-translational regulation of plant immunity. Curr. Opin. 

Plant Biol. 38, 124–132. 

Witzel, K., Üstün, S., Schreiner, M., Grosch, R., B¨ornke, F., Ruppel, S., 2017. A proteomic 
approach suggests unbalanced proteasome functioning induced by the growth- 
promoting bacterium Kosakonia radicincitans in Arabidopsis. Front. Plant Sci. https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2017.00661. 

Wu, C.H., Yeh, A.S.L., Huang, H., Arminski, L., Castro-Alvean, J., Chen, Y., Hu, Z., 

Kourtesis, P., Ledley, R.S., Suzek, B.E., Vinayaka, C.R., Zhang, J., Barker, C.W., 2003. 
The protein information resource. Nucleic Acid Res. 31, 345–347. 

Wu, L., Han, Z., Wang, S., Wang, X., Sun, A., Zu, X., Chen, Y., 2013. Comparative 

proteomic analysis of the plant-virus interaction in resistant and susceptible ecotypes 
of maize infected with sugarcane mosaic virus. J. Proteom. 26, 124–140. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jprot.2013.06.005. 

Yang, X., Dondeti, V., Dezube, R., Maynard, D.M., Geer, L.Y., Epstein, J., Chen, X., 
Markey, S.P., Kowalak, J.A., 2004. DBParser, web-based software for shotgun 
proteomic data analyses. J. Proteome Res. 3, 1002–1008. 

Yasueda, Y., Tamura, T., Fujisawa, A., Kuwata, K., Tsukiji, S., Kiyonaka, S., Hamachi, I., 
2016. A set of organelle-localizable reactive molecules for mitochondrial chemical 
proteomics in living cells and brain tissues. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 13824, 7592–7602. 

Yates, J.R., Ruse, C.I., Nakorchevsky, A., 2009. Proteomics by mass spectrometry, 
approaches, advances, and applications. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 11, 49–79. 
Yeom, S.I., Baek, H.K., Oh, S.K., Kang, W.H., Lee, S.J., Lee, J.M., Seo, E., Rose, J.K.C., 
Kim, B.D., Choi, D., 2011. Use of a secretion trap screen in pepper following 
Phytophthora capsici infection reveals novel functions of secreted plant proteins in 
modulating cell death. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 246, 671–684. https://doi.org/ 
10.1094/MPMI -08-10-0183. 

Yu, C., Chen, H., Tian, F., Yang, F., Yuan, X., Yang, C.H., He, C., 2018. A ten gene- 
containing genomic island determines flagellin glycosylation, implication for its 
regulatory role in motility and virulence of Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae. Mol. 
Plant Pathol. 19, 579–592. 

Zhang, J., Shao, F., Li, Y., Cui, H., Chen, L., Li, H., Zou, Y., Long, C., Lan, L., Chai, J., 

Chen, S., Tang, X., Zhou, J.M., 2007. Pseudomonas syringaeA effector inactivates 
MAPKs to suppress PAMP-induced immunity in plants. Cell Host Microbe 1, 
175–185. 

Zhang, Y.M., Zhao, J.M., Xiang, Y., Bian, X.C., Zuo, Q.M., Shen, Q., Gai, J.Y., Xing, H., 
2011. Proteomics study of changes in soybean lines resistant and sensitive to 
Phytophthora sojae. Proteome Sci. 9, 52. https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-5956-9-52. 
Zhang, X., Fu, J., Hiromasa, Y., Pan, H., Bai, G., 2013. Differentially expressed proteins 
associated with Fusarium head blight resistance in wheat. PLoS One 812, e82079. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0082079. 

Zhou, W., Eudes, F., Laroche, A., 2006. Identification of differentially regulated proteins 
in response to a compatible interaction between the pathogen Fusarium graminearum 
and its host, Triticum aestivum. Proteomics 6, 4599–4609. 

Zimaro, T., Gottig, N., Garavaglia, B.S., Gehring, C., Ottado, J., 2011. Unraveling plant 
responses to bacterial pathogens through proteomics. J. Biomed. Biotechnol., 
354801 https://doi.org/10.1155/2011/354801. 

Zubarev, R.A., Kelleher, N.L., McLafferty, F.W., 1998. Electron capture dissociation of 

multiply charged protein cations. A nonergodic process. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 
3265–3266. 

MicrobiologicalResearch242(2021)12659011