Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Materials Today Bio

journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/materials-today-bio

Bioengineered Co-culture of organoids to recapitulate
host-microbe interactions

Min Beom Kim a, Soonho Hwangbo b, c, Sungho Jang d, e, f, Yun Kee Jo a, g, *

a Department of Biomedical Convergence Science and Technology, School of Convergence, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, South Korea
b Department of Chemical Engineering, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 52828, South Korea
c Department of Materials Engineering and Convergence Technology, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 52828, South Korea
d Division of Bioengineering, College of Life Sciences and Bioengineering, Incheon National University, Incheon 22012, South Korea
e Department of Bioengineering and Nano-Bioengineering, Incheon National University, Incheon 22012, South Korea
f Research Center for Bio Materials & Process Development, Incheon National University, Incheon 22012, South Korea
g Cell and Matrix Research Institute, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41944, South Korea

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Organoids
Co-culture model
Host-microbe interaction
Human physiology
Pathophysiology

The recent spike in the instances of complex physiological host-microbe interactions has raised the demand for
developing in vitro models that recapitulate the microbial microenvironment in the human body. Organoids are
steadily emerging as an in vitro culture system that closely mimics the structural, functional, and genetic features
of complex human organs, particularly for better understanding host-microbe interactions. Recent advances in
organoid culture technology have become new avenues for assessing the pathogenesis of symbiotic interactions,
pathogen-induced infectious diseases, and various other diseases. The co-cultures of organoids with microbes
have shown great promise in simulating host-microbe interactions with a high level of complexity for further
advancement in related ﬁelds. In this review, we provide an overview of bioengineering approaches for microbe-
co-cultured organoids. Latest developments in the applications of microbe-co-cultured organoids to study human
physiology and pathophysiology are also highlighted. Further, an outlook on future research on bioengineered
organoid co-cultures for various applications is presented.

1. Introduction

Microbes have increasingly emerged as key players in modulating
various physiological and pathophysiological processes in a human host
[1,2]. The majority of microbes in extensively colonized tissues,
including those of the gastrointestinal tract and upper respiratory tract,
aid in normal development and function of human body system. While
they protect the host from infection and maintain host health, some
microbial components and the resulting changes in the environment can
cause infectious diseases such as coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
and several types of ulcerative [1,3–6]. Despite numerous efforts in the
last decade, research into diverse host-microbe interactions and their
impact on the development and progression of diseases remains at
nascent stages due to limited availability of human tissues and the lack of
in vitro models [7].

Organoids are three-dimensional (3D) multicellular tissue constructs
derived from the self-organization of stem cells [8]. Primary stem cells or

pluripotent stem cells cultured in vitro under conditions similar to the
speciﬁc microenvironment in the human body allow the generation of
organoids that mimic their corresponding organs, such as the small in-
testine, brain, lung, and stomach [9–12]. Conventional two-dimensional
(2D) culture systems are relatively simple but pose challenges in reca-
pitulating the composition of differentiated cells and tissue function [13].
The use of in vivo models can overcome these problems and permit the
execution of more complex studies in the presence of interconnected cells
and tissues. Among these, in vivo mouse models have been successfully
adopted to study the host-microbe interactions owing to their genetic and
taxonomic similarities to the human microbiome [14,15]. Nevertheless,
animal models are associated with ethical issues, greater time and
ﬁnancial costs, and species-associated variance [16]. Organoids mimic
the gene and protein expression, metabolic function, and microstructure
of in vivo tissues of animal models, offering a promising in vitro system to
address the gap between 2D cultures and in vivo animal experiments [17].
For example, upon infection with microorganism, the organoid models

* Corresponding author. Department of Biomedical Convergence Science and Technology, School of Convergence, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566,

South Korea.

E-mail address: ykjo@knu.ac.kr (Y.K. Jo).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2022.100345
Received 25 April 2022; Received in revised form 26 June 2022; Accepted 27 June 2022
Available online 1 July 2022
2590-0064/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

have shown higher microbial-associated proteins than the 2D culture
model, directly highlighting the suitability and superiority of organoids
In particular,
for modeling of host-microbe interactions [18,19].
patient-derived organoids allow for the pathophysiological studies of the
cellular mechanism and diversity, from the of host-microbe interactions
viewpoint [20].

To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst review that provides a
comprehensive overview of development in the bioengineering of orga-
noids to study the host commensal/pathogenic microbial interactions, in
an organ-speciﬁc manner (Fig. 1). We have summarized the experimental
techniques and key features of organoid co-cultures. Next, we describe
recent breakthroughs in organoids co-cultures to recapitulate several
target organs in the gastrointestinal, respiratory, nervous, reproductive,
and urinary systems. Finally, we discuss the practical limitations of co-
cultured organoids and offer some perspectives and outlook for the
future.

2. Preparation of organoids-microbial co-culture models

To understand the interactions between organoids and microbes in
greater depth, it is imperative to simulate an environment that mimics
that of the human body harboring resident microbes. Particularly, most
organoid culture models have an enclosed architecture surrounded by
cells, thus limiting access and hindering the interaction between the
inner apical epithelial cells and microorganisms. To overcome these
limitations in 2D and 3D cultures, different approaches, such as the
microinjection technique, generation of apical-out organoids and
monolayer cultures, have been adopted (Fig. 2). In this section, we
discuss methods for effectively exposing microbes to organoids.

2.1. Microinjection into the organoids

Microinjection has been widely used to mechanically deliver DNA,
RNA, protein, peptide, sperms, and drugs to single cells [21]. Addition-
ally, infectious diseases have been modeled through and intracellular
injection of various microbes, such as Salmonella [22], Clostridium difﬁcile
[23], Escherichia coli [24], and viruses [25], to obtain mechanistic

Fig. 2. Overview of methods for constructing microbe-co-cultured organo-
ids model.

insights. Microinjection into the lumen of organoids facilitates the
interaction of the microbes with the apical side of organoids and has been
considered an accurate, efﬁcient, and practical method of delivering
microbes, with low cytotoxicity for the organoid-microbe co-culture [21,
26]. In particular, since organoids have a lower oxygen concentration
compared to the external environment,
intra-organoid
microinjection in the co-culture of anaerobic microbes can help mini-
mize their exposure to oxygen [27]. Microscale device capable of highly
efﬁcient and reproducible microinjection of microbes into the lumen of
organoids has been developed [28]. Moreover, a double-barrel perfusion
system has shown to provide constant luminal access and allow regula-
tion of luminal contents and luminal mixing, thereby enabling the
increased success rate of perfusion with a higher gastrointestinal motility

the use of

Fig. 1. Schematic illustration for microbe-co-cultured organoid models and various applications.

2

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

and microbiome stability. However, manual microinjection restricts
high-throughput experiments and often leads to variation in the
co-cultured organoids generated [20,29,30]. The injection of varying
number of microbial cells into the lumen can further exacerbate the
non-uniformity in multiplicity of infection of organoids caused by
different sizes and cell composition ratios [28,29]. In addition, the
maintenance of oxygen/nutrient levels suitable for the symbiosis of
organoids and microbes is a challenge that still remains to be solved [27,
29,31].

2.2. Suspension on the outside of the organoids

Most organoids are generated as basal-out structures and can be
facilely co-cultured with microbes in a simple suspension [32–36].
However, this approach limits the access of microbes to the apical side of
organoids mainly due to their closed conformation. A simple suspension
of microbes in the medium for the culture of apical-out organoids, in
which the luminal and basal structures are inverted, can be an alternative
method that maintains barrier integrity and functional properties by
modulating extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins during cultivation
[37–40]. In particular, the apical-out organoids could address the limi-
tations of
such as
multi-equipment requirement, labor-intensive process, and vulnerability
to the inﬂux of epithelial cells into the lumen. Nevertheless, on
comparing with common basolateral-out organoids,
the apical-out
organoids still pose challenges due to their low proliferation, poorly
controlled differentiation, and uncertainty in the complete reversal of
inner and outer cavities [27,39].

intra-organoid microinjection,

conventional

2.3. Culture with organoids-derived monolayers

Organoid-derived monolayer cultures can be established by incu-
bating single cells or organoid fragments dissociated enzymatically from
3D organoids on a Transwell or ﬂat culture surface in a medium con-
taining microbes, supplemented with several types of nutrients [41–47].
During the diffusion of the microbe-containing medium through the
dome of complex matrices (i.e., Matrigel or Basement Membrane
Extract), organoids located at the edge of the dome are more difﬁcult to
access by microbes than those located in the center of the dome. How-
ever, single cell monolayers derived from organoids can increase the
access rate of microbes toward the cell
lumen with an additional
advantage of allowing easy sample collection at various time points [42].
In addition, organoid-derived monolayers can be employed as a powerful
model for co-culture with aerobic bacteria, since the Transwell has a
larger area in contact with oxygen than those with anaerobic bacteria
[27,42]. To generate organoids with resident anaerobes, an anaerobic
environment needs to be maintained with a continuous provision of
nutrients; failure to do so shortens the lifespan of the organoids and
microbes are induced to overgrow, making it difﬁcult to achieve a stable,
long-term culture.

To overcome the limitations of the different levels of oxygen re-
quirements between epithelial cells and microbes in Transwell co-
cultures, a 2D culture system for human colonic epithelium called the
intestinal hemi-anaerobic co-culture system (IHACS) consisting of a
hypoxic apical chamber and normoxic basal chamber has been developed
[27,48,49]. A hypoxic environment is essential for anaerobic microbes,
while a normoxic condition is critical for the survival of epithelial cells.
Therefore, the IHACS system can complement the environmental gap
between organoids and microbes to ensure their survival [48]. Besides, a
variety of culture methods,
including organoids-on-chip and a
microﬂuidics-based human microbial crosstalk (HuMiX) model, have
been extensively used to address the limitations of Transwell cultures
[50–52].

3

3. Microbe-co-cultured organoids of different organs

Research into microbes and the physiological/pathological under-
standing of various organs that have characteristics similar to those of
tissues and organoids of the human body is steadily progressing through
the use of organoid models (Table 1). In this section, we discuss organ-
speciﬁc co-culture systems with pathogens and symbionts to under-
stand interactions and molecular mechanisms in the human body.

3.1. Digestive system

3.1.1. Intestine

Intestinal organoids are composed of various intestinal cell types,
including epithelial cells, goblet cells, enteroendocrine cells, and Paneth
cells, in addition to stem cells, and have been utilized as a 3D in vitro
model to study the development and diseases of the intestinal epithelium
[53]. The structural and functional similarities to real intestinal tissue
render intestinal organoids ideal to model disease of the small intestinal,
such as inﬂammatory bowel disease and colorectal cancer [54,55]. In
addition, co-cultures of intestinal organoids with various pathogenic
microbes, including C. difﬁcile, Salmonella, and viruses, have been uti-
lized as a research model for understanding viral pathogenesis and
host-microbial dynamics. As the gut is more densely populated with
microbes than other organs, many studies have previously focused on the
co-culture of intestinal organoids with microbes [56,57].

Viruses are infectious microorganisms that need to penetrate living
host cells for replication and proliferation [58]. Co-cultures of organoids
and viruses have emerged as in vitro models for studying the patho-
physiology of viruses and development of therapeutics. Many studies
have demonstrated that viruses can multiply within intestinal organoids
and successfully infect intestinal cells (Fig. 3A) [19,59–61]. Currently, no
available therapeutic modalities, such as speciﬁc treatment method,
antibiotics/antiviral drug regimens, or intestinal motility inhibitors, exist
to treat infections by rotavirus, the most common viral pathogen that
causes diarrhea and enteritis, or norovirus, the virus that induces acute
gastroenteritis. Up to 50% cells of differentiated intestinal organoids,
which exhibit a “villi-like” epithelial phenotype, were infected with
rotavirus, whereas a signiﬁcantly lower proportion of undifferentiated
“crypt-like” immature organoids were infected by the same pathogen
(Fig. 3B and C) [60]. The administration of antiviral agents inhibits
rotavirus in infected intestinal organoids, indicating that virus-infected
organoids recapitulate the in vivo environment more closely than the
cell line model [19]. Further, the necessity of bile for the replication of
human norovirus in organoids and the enhancement of norovirus repli-
cation in the intestinal epithelium lacking an interferon response have
been conﬁrmed using genetically modiﬁed intestinal organoids [61].
Similarly, in a reovirus-infected intestinal organoid model, the genetic
manipulation of type I and type III interferon receptors inhibited reovirus
infection responsible for gastrointestinal disorders; and the antiviral ac-
tivity induced by type III interferon was highly dependent on the
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) signaling pathway, unlike
type I interferon [62].

Salmonella is an enterobacterial pathogen that invades the intestinal
mucosal surface, causing massive damage, along with gastrointestinal
infections and typhoid outbreaks, resulting in thousands of deaths
worldwide [63]. Microbial interactions of Salmonella with the gut have
been analyzed using a microinjection into the lumen of intestinal orga-
noids [22,64–66]. Salmonella-infected organoids exhibited inﬂammatory
responses and the disruption of the epithelial tight junction via the
expression of multiple genes and activation of the NF-κB pathway
(Fig. 3D) [67]. The pretreatment of intestinal epithelial cells with IL-22
cell priming in patient-derived organoids carrying an IL10RB gene mu-
tation that inactivates the IL-22 receptor inhibited early viral invasion

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

Table 1
Summary of co-cultured organoids developed for the study of host-microbe interactions in various organs. Abbreviation: Severe acute respiratory syndrom-coronavirus-
2, SARS-CoV-2.

Organ

Intestine

Origin

Mouse

Model

Microinjection

Suspension

Monolayer

Human

Microinjection

Suspension

Monolayer

Microinjection
Suspension
Monolayer

Suspension
Monolayer
Microinjection
Microinjection
Suspension
Monolayer

Suspension
Monolayer
Microinjection

Suspension

Monolayer

Suspension

Suspension
Monolayer
Suspension
Suspension

Monolayer
Suspension
Suspension
Suspension
Suspension

Colon

Liver

Stomach

Gallbladder

Lung

Mouse
Human

Human

Mouse
Human

Mouse

Human

Brain

Human

Fallopian tube

Cervix
Kidney

Blood vessel
Tonsil
Eye
Oral

Mouse
Human
Human
Human

Human
Human
Human
Human

Microbe

Ref

Salmonella
Cryptosporidium parvum
Rotavirus
Inﬂuenza virus
Salmonella
Lactobacillus
Toxoplasma gondii
Giardia duodenalis
Salmonella
Clostridium difﬁcile
Escherichia coli
Lactobacillus
Rotavirus
Reovirus
Lactobacillus
Escherichia coli
Salmonella
Norovirus
Escherichia coli
Salmonella
Lactobacillus
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
Escherichia coli
Biﬁdobacterium adolescentis
Bacteroides fragilis
Clostridium butyricum
Akkermansia muciniphila
Hepatitis B virus
Hepatitis E virus
Helicobacter pylori
Helicobacter pylori
Helicobacter pylori
SARS-CoV-2
Epstein-Barr virus
Salmonella
Salmonella
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Mycobacterium abscessus
Human parainﬂuenza virus type 3
Respiratory syncytial virus
Aspergillus fumigatus
Cryptosporidium parvum
Respiratory syncytial virus
SARS-CoV-2
Inﬂuenza A virus
SARS-CoV-2
Zika virus
Human immunodeﬁciency virus
Herpes simplex virus
Toxoplasma gondii
Chlamydia trachomatis
Chlamydia trachomatis
Chlamydia trachomatis
SARS-CoV-2
BK-virus
SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-2
Herpes simplex virus
Human papillomavirus

[64]
[164]
[19]
[33]
[67]
[73,76,77]
[84]
[84]
[22,65,66]
[23,68]
[24,28,74,78]
[72]
[59,60]
[62]
[75]
[75]
[44]
[61]
[79]
[85]
[89]
[42]
[43,47]
[48]
[48]
[48]
[48]
[94,95]
[92]
[100,101,103]
[98,99]
[102]
[45]
[46]
[35]
[105]
[108]
[108]
[111]
[113]
[126]
[163,164]
[115]
[118,119,122]
[117]
[120]
[25,34,128,129,131,132,135]
[136]
[137]
[139]
[145]
[140]
[149]
[18,36,155]
[152]
[154]
[155]
[166]
[167]
[150]
[150]

and induced a barrier phenotype for more effective control of Salmonella
infection (Fig. 3E) [65]. In addition, the activation of naturally secreted
α-defensin in the complex environment of the intestinal lumen protected
the organoid epithelium; gene expression proﬁling and biochemical as-
says showed that interleukin-22 (IL-22) induced the release of antimi-
crobial peptides and chemokines and aided in the maintenance of the
defensive intestinal epithelial barrier in response to infection.

Intestinal organoids infected with pathogens have also been used to
conﬁrm that intestinal epithelial cells play a key role in regulating

intestinal homeostasis and restraining pathogens. Patients infected with
C. difﬁcile, an enterobacterial pathogen, show a decrease in the expres-
sion of MUC2, a major indicator of a defect in the protective mucosal
barrier against pathogen invasion. Intestinal organoids decrease the
production of MUC2 when infected with C. difﬁcile, and the pathogen
binds to MUC1 to deliver the toxin (Fig. 3F) [68]. In addition, the cell line
model showed only a higher toxicity of C. difﬁcile toxin TcdB than
another toxin TcdA, whereas organoids demonstrated that TcdA exhibi-
ted more potent toxicity than TcdB, causing a disruption of the intestinal

4

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

Fig. 3. Pathogenic microbe-infected small intestinal organoids. (A) Immunoﬂuorescence images of human rotavirus (HRV; strains Ito)-infected (right) organoids [60].
(B) The presence of intracellular rotavirus antigen in single cells from undifferentiated and differentiated organoids analyzed by ﬂow cytometry [60]. (C) The amount
of infectious virus in undifferentiated and differentiated organoids [60]. (D) Western blot analysis of tight junction proteins (Zo-1, Occludin, Claudin-2, and Claudin-7)
in Salmonella-infected organoids [67]. (E) Gentamicin protection assays of IL-22-treated Salmonella-infected organoids [65]. (F) Confocal images of organoids injected
with healthy stool and C. difﬁcile. Scale bar, 50 μm [68]. (G) Representative images of ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate (FITC, green)-dextran leakage from the lumen of
organoids treated with C. difﬁcile toxin tcdA and tcdB [23].

epithelial barrier function (Fig. 3G) [23,69,70]. This result is consistent
with those reported in previous studies on the inactivation of the GTPase
Rap that regulates cell-cell junctions through TcdA [71].

Lactobacilli, probiotic symbiotic bacterial species residing in the
human small intestine, have been extensively used to maintain the
integrity of the intestinal epithelial barrier and treat a variety of intestinal
disorders. Despite their ability to exert health-promoting effects and
beneﬁcially modulate gut immunity, the limited access to human small
intestine has made it difﬁcult to establish research models for their study.
Recently, a co-culture system of intestinal organoids and symbiotic
bacteria Lactobacillus reuteri and Lactobacillus plantarum has been devel-
oped to demonstrate higher proliferation and viability when Lactobacilli
were microinjected into the lumen of mature intestinal organoids rather
than immature organoids (Fig. 4A) [72]. In addition, a co-culture of
Lactobacilli-infected intestinal organoids with intestinal lymphocytes has
shown that the colonization of lactobacilli promotes the proliferation of
intestinal epithelium and repairs damaged intestinal mucosa by
increasing the number of Lgr5
cells (Fig. 4B) [73]. It also
stimulates the secretion of IL-22 from the lymphocytes eventually
inducing the phosphorylation of the signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 (STAT3) protein (Fig. 4C) [74]. The co-culture of Lacto-
bacillus rhanmosus in small intestine organoids led to increase the degree
of Paneth cell differentiation and the expression level of Ki-67, indicating
the potential of the application of microorganisms to enhance the growth
and differentiation of intestinal stem cells [75]. To study how Lactoba-
cillus affects infection of Salmonella, which has shown to cause villi
annihilation and collapse of intestinal organoids [22,64–67], the small
intestine organoids were infected with Salmonella after pre-treatment

and lysozyme

þ

þ

þ

with Lactobacillus acidophilus [76]. L. acidophilus inhibited Salmonella
invasion, as well as showed the ability to protect the intestinal mucosa
from pathogen infection. L. acidophilus pre-treatment increased the
expression of MUC2 to protect the invasion of Salmonella, and reduced
the damage of intestinal organoids by tumor necrosis factor-α and the
ratio of apoptotic cells, thereby positively affecting the formation of in-
testinal organoids. In addition, L. acidophilus suppressed the excessive
proliferation of goblet cells and Paneth cells induced by Salmonella, and
ameliorated overactivation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway upon contact
with toll-like receptor 2. Similarly, another organoid co-culture model
conﬁrmed that L. reuteri D8 increase the mRNA expression of R-spondin,
Wnt3 and Lrp5 to activate the Wnt/β-catenin pathway and to increase
Lgr5 protein levels and Lgr
cell numbers [77]. The surface area of in-
testinal organoids was signiﬁcantly increased in L. reuteri D8 co-culture,
while stimulating intestinal epithelial proliferation through the increases
in expression of c-Myc, cyclin and Ki-67. Also, the recovery function of
L. reuteri D8 was conﬁrmed in pathological conditions such as intestinal
organoid damage and destruction induced by tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), where L. reuteri D8 improved the expression of Lgr5, Olfm4, and
Ascl2 which were inhibited by TNF by decreasing TNF expression. These
results veriﬁed that commensal bacteria are effective in restoring intes-
tinal damage and maintaining homeostasis after infection and patho-
logical damage caused by exogenous bacteria, suggesting potential as a
In another study,
promising therapeutic technique in the future.
co-culture with E. coli, a non-pathogenic commensal bacteria common in
the intestine, prevented the loss of E-cadherin expression in intestinal
organoids, increased production of reactive oxygen species, and pro-
moted apoptosis [78]. The intestinal organoid model has also been

5

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

Fig. 4. Symbiotic bacteria-co-cultured small intestinal organoids. (A) Time-lapse images of immature and mature organoids after microinjection with red ﬂuorescence
protein (RFP)-expressing L. plantarum. Scale bar, 200 μm [72]. (B) Immunoﬂuorescence images of control (Ctrl), L. reuteri D8 (D8)-infected and heat killed D8 (HK-D8)
organoids with (top) or without (bottom) the treatment of TNF-α [73]. (C) Histological images of periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)- and Alcian blue-stained organoids
microinjected with E. coli [74].

shown to be a comparative analytical model for non-pathogenic and
pathogenic microbes; the colonization of intestinal organoids with
non-pathogenic E. coli activates antimicrobial defense pathways,
including mucus production and genes related to toll-like receptor,
cytokine, and NF-κB signaling. It also leads to an upregulated the genes
associated with intestinal maturation and a loss of intestinal epithelial
barrier function [24,74,79]. Taken together, the co-culture of intestinal
organoids with various bacteria and viruses can serve as a useful tool that
aids in understanding host-microbe interactions.

Toxoplasma gondii and Giardia duodenalis are the two most common
parasites associated with protozoan diseases in humans and animals
[80–83]. Both parasites are zoonotic pathogens that mainly infect to the
hosts through the small intestine. However, the interactions between
parasites and small intestinal tissues are still elusive, and current ap-
proaches for studying the host-pathogen interactions depend mainly on
the immortalized cell line-based 2D models [80]. To understand the
mechanism of parasite infection, single and simultaneous infection of
T. gondii and G. duodenalis was performed on organoid-derived mono-
layers (ODMs) [84]. From the measurement of transepithelial-electric
resistance to conﬁrm the disturbance of intestinal barrier function, no
signiﬁcant effect on barrier function was observed in ODM infected with
T. gondii, whereas G. duodenalis-infected ODM exhibited a loss of barrier
function through a decrease in epithelial resistance. In addition, unlike
T. gondii infection that shows no clear change in the expression of tight
junction proteins such as zonula occluden 1 (ZO-1) and occludin, there
was signiﬁcant changes in tight junction proteins in G. duodenalis infec-
tion and co-infection of T. gondii and G. duodenalis.

3.1.2. Colon

Enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) is a ﬂesh-eating pathogen that
causes various complications, such as hemorrhagic colitis and hemolytic
uremic syndrome [6]. Few studies exist on the interaction between the
colon and EHEC before the onset of complications, due to a lack of
appropriate animal models and the presence of asymptomatic conditions
upon immediate EHEC infection. Human colon organoids co-cultured
with EHEC can therefore be a sophisticated pathophysiological model
that enables molecular-level studies, facilitating the analysis of colon
disease during the early phase (0–8 h) of EHEC infection. The differen-
tiated organoids demonstrated a higher degree of EHEC colonization
than their undifferentiated counterparts
[43]. The
EHEC-infected organoids revealed that the thickness of the MUC2 mucus
layer, a protective barrier between commensal bacteria and colonic
epithelium, was rapidly reduced (< 6 h) after infection (Fig. 5B). Another
þ
study conﬁrmed that DNA damage was induced via co-culture with pks
E. coli that produces colibactin, a genetic toxin (Fig. 5C) [85].

(Fig. 5A)

Biﬁdobacterium adolescentis is an anaerobic bacterium that colonizes
the intestinal mucus layer and provides many health beneﬁts to the host
in a symbiotic-like relationship such as mucus production [86].
B. adolescentis was co-cultured on a monolayer derived from colon
organoids to determine how B. adolescentis supports colon homeostasis
and function through interaction with the colon [48]. B. adolescentis
upregulated the expressions of MUC2 in colon epithelium and stem cell
marker genes such as LGR5, AXIN2, and PTK7, which demonstrates the
stem cell-promoting effects of B. adolescentis. In addition, successful
colony formation was also observed thorough co-cultures with obligate
anaerobic bacteria such as Bactericides fragilis and Clostridium butyricum.

6

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

Fig. 5. E. coli-infected colon organoids. (A) Quantiﬁcation of enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) or EHECΔespA bacteria associated with organoids [43]. (B) MUC2
þ
expression in EHEC-infected organoids [43]. (C) Immunoﬂuorescence images for DNA damage induction (γH2AX) of pks
E. coli-co-cultured colon organoids [85].

In particular, the co-culture with Akkermansia muciniphila revealed that
A. muciniphila grew by decomposing the mucin layer without adding
exogeneous mucin,
thereby demonstrating the biological effect of
epithelium on intestinal bacteria.

One of the most widely used probiotic strains, Lactobacillus rhamnosus
GG (LGG), has been known to improve symptoms of irritable bowel
syndrome (IBS); however, the mechanism has not been clearly elucidated
[87,88]. The LGG-co-cultured-organoid model analyzed how LGG affects
the intestinal epithelial barrier lost by interferon-γ, a major cytokine in
IBS that disrupts intestinal barrier homeostasis [89]. Upon injection of
interferon-γ into the organoids without LGG infection, the function of
intestinal epithelial barrier was disrupted, resulting in decreased gene
expression of tight junction ZO-1 and occludin, and rapid loss of barrier
integrity. However, in LGG-co-cultured organoids, the expression of ZO-1
and occluding was shown similar to that of normal organoids, while
exhibiting normalization of the epithelial barrier function.

3.1.3. Liver

Hepatotropic viruses are representative microorganisms that pose
signiﬁcant public health problems with a great impact on global mor-
tality, and thus the models to understand the host-virus interactions and
the mechanisms of viral pathogenicity are urgently needed [90]. Among
these hepatotropic viruses, hepatitis E virus (HEV) is one of the most
common causes of acute hepatitis and acute liver failure [91]. To un-
derstand the mechanism of HEV, the intrahepatic cholangiocyte orga-
noids derived from the intrahepatic biliary compartment were
co-cultured with the HEVs (Fig. 6A) [92]. HEV has been known to be
replicated from hepatocytes and transported across the apical membrane
into
organoid model,
hepatocyte-secreted albumin is directed basolaterally, whereas HEV
particles were mostly emitted toward the apex (Fig. 6B and C). The
intrahepatic cholangiocyte organoids
in
response to the treatment of ribavirin and mycophenolic acid. HEV
replication stimulated robust type I interferon responses, indicating the
potential for interferon α-based HEV suppression therapy.

showed anti-HEV effects

the HEV-infected

ducts;

bile

the

in

Similar to HEV, hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a type of hepatotropic virus
and can cause persistent and chronic infections in humans [93]. The liver
organoids infected with HBV showed a decrease in membrane microvilli,
a hallmark of ﬁbrosing liver disease, and upregulation of epithelial
to organoid hepatic
mesenchymal

transition markers,

leading

dysfunction [94].
In another study, HBV-infected liver organoids
exhibited an upregulation of mRNA expression of the organoid-derived
signature genes, and differentiated organoids showed higher HBV
infection efﬁciency than immature organoids in expansion medium due
to overexpression of sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide
[95]. The HBV infection early gene signatures and biomarkers could be
identiﬁed through comparative transcriptome analysis of healthy orga-
noids and HBV-infected patients-derived organoids. In particular, by
identifying the gene signatures of hepatocellular carcinoma and early
liver cancer, the organoid infection model could be utilized as a prom-
ising model to predict development of the carcinoma and to understand
the molecular mechanisms underlying HBV replication in primary cells.

3.1.4. Stomach

Helicobacter pylori, a microaerobic spiral-shaped bacterium found in
the human stomach, can cause gastric adenocarcinoma and various
stomach disorders [96,97]. In vitro studies of H. pylori have mainly relied
on the use of transformed cell lines as infection models; however, this
approach is particularly inadequate for understanding the mechanisms of
cancer development due to their artiﬁcial physiological features. When
H. pylori is microinjected into the lumen of gastric organoids to study its
interactions with the gastric epithelium [98–101], metabolites released
from gastric organoids by a bacterial chemoreceptor (TlpB) rapidly
attract bacterial cells (Fig. 7A) [102]. In addition, the co-culture of
organoids with H. pylori lacking the virulence factor CagA has been
employed to conﬁrm that CagA forms a complex with the C-Met receptor
after translocation to gastric epithelial cells, disrupting the epithelial
layer [99,103]. In another study, the suppression of the differentiation
cluster gene CD44 in H. pylori-infected gastric organoids led to a decrease
in H. pylori-induced hyperproliferation and cancer induction (Fig. 7B and
C) [100]. NF-κB activation led to the H. pylori
infection-induced
expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh) [101]. Collectively, the gastric
organoid model can be used to elucidate potential mechanisms of
H. pylori infection as well as to study various gastric pathologies.

3.1.5. Gallbladder

Salmonella infection has been reported as a main risk factor for gall-
bladder carcinoma; however, the direct association and mechanism are
not precisely known yet [104]. Infected gallbladder organoids show a
loss of cohesion and polarity and irregular nuclear morphology [35].

7

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

Fig. 6. HEV-infected liver organoids. (A) Immuno-
ﬂuorescence staining for HEV ORF2 protein in intra-
hepatic cholangiocyte organoids on day 3 after
infectious HEV particles [92]. (B) Quantiﬁcation of
released viruses from polarized cells inoculated with
HEV particles. Scale bar, 20 μM [92]. (C) Release of
albumin into apical and basolateral compartments
from polarized cells cultured in expansion medium
(EM) with cholangiocyte phenotype or differentiation
medium (DM) with hepatocyte phenotype (n ¼ 3)
[92].

Fig. 7. H. pylori-infected gastric organoids. (A) Motility tracings of H. pylori's response to organoid-conditioned media (top) and non-conditioned media (bottom) at 1 s
þ
and 30 s post-injection [102]. (B) Immunoﬂuorescence images and (C) western blot analysis of EdU
cells in control (CON), H. pylori (HP)-infected, CD44v6
neutralizing antibody-treated (CD44v6), and CD44v6 neutralizing antibody-treated HP-infected (CD44v6þHP) organoids [100].

the overexpression of c-MYC and inactivation of

Meanwhile,
the
Arf/TP53 pathway induce the transformation of Salmonella-infected cell.
Moreover, Salmonella promotes cell division and phenotypic transition of
infected cells by activating the MAPK and protein kinase B (AKT) path-
ways (Fig. 8A). In addition, the prolonged maintenance of gallbladder
organoid culture was shown to be dependent on R-spondin that mediates
activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway and regeneration of
gallbladder epithelium by Lgr5
cells [105]. In addition, the role of
Salmonella toxin ΔcdtB that induces typhoid was demonstrated through
NF-κB target gene analyses. These gallbladder organoid-based studies
have opened new avenues to understand the direct relationship of bac-
teria with oncogenesis (Fig. 8B).

þ

3.2. Respiratory system

Lung is the main route of Mycobacteria, and its infection causes severe
morbidity and mortality. Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the main cause of
tuberculosis, has been extensively shown to be associated with diseases
such as pulmonary complications and autoimmune diseases [106].
Meanwhile, Mycobacterium abscessus, does not cause tuberculosis but can
cause immunosuppression and a wide range of diseases [107]. The
airway organoids infected with M. tuberculosis and M. abscessus were
constructed via microinjection [108]. Upon mycobacteria infection,
downregulation of NF-Κb regulatory genes led to low expression of
In addition, co-culture of
mucins
showed that
mycobacteria-infected organoids with macrophages

such as MUC5B and MUC4.

8

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

Fig. 8. Salmonella-infected gallbladder organoids. (A) Histological images of H&E (top)- and E-cadherin (bottom)-stained gallbladder organoids. Scale bar, 20 μm
[35]. (B) Heat map for manually selected NF-κB target genes, with a comparison of wild type (w.t.) Salmonella and SalmonellaΔcdtB infections at 2 and 7 days
post-infection [105].

macrophages migrated to the basal edge of the organoid to capture and
ingest bacteria, thus conﬁrming that macrophages are essential for
tuberculosis diseases.

Human parainﬂuenza virus type 3 (HPIV3) infects lower respiratory
tract epithelial cells and causes childhood bronchiolitis and pneumonia,
however, its effect on the lung has not been precisely known [109]. Most
current studies on HPIV3 rely on immortalized cell lines; a realistic
lung-like model is necessary to understand the interaction of the lung
with vial surface glycoproteins that mediate the entry of viruses into host
cells [109,110]. HPIV infection was performed either by depositing an
inoculum under Matrigel adjacent to the lung organoid tissue or by
microinjection, both of which conﬁrmed that HPIV3 targeted the alveoli
[111]. The infected cells exhibited viral entry without syncytium for-
mation, and particles released by the virus diffused to adjacent locations
within the alveolar structure.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a virus that causes acute lower
respiratory tract infection in infants; despite extensive research efforts,
there is no licensed vaccine or effective antiviral agent yet, and little is
known about the immunobiology of RSV infection [112]. In the human
lung organoids, RSV infection was conﬁrmed in smooth muscle
actin-positive and vimentin-positive expressing cells, but not
in
tubulin-positive expressing cells [113]. Similar to cilia formation known
as a cytopathic effect of the virus in mature airways, RSV infection
reduced the population of FoxJ1-positive ciliated cells and altered
organoid structures such as E-cadherin destruction. In addition, by
comparing RSV-infected and non-infected organoids, high expression of
proteins belonging to the category of neutrophil degranulation, which
the pathogenesis of RSV-induced inﬂammation, was
inﬂuence
conﬁrmed. The RSV-infected cells have shown to swell and ﬂow into the
lumen of organoid branching structure, which is similar to archival pa-
thology [114,115].

Inﬂuenza A virus is a pathogenic virus that can infect a variety of
hosts, such as birds and mammals, including humans [116]. However,
the model to predict cross-species virus transmission potential and
inﬂuenza infectivity remains still lacking. The human airway organoids
model replicates the avian inﬂuenza H7N6/Ah virus with high human
infectivity more strongly than the avian inﬂuenza H7N2 virus with low
human infectivity,
the possibility of distinguished
cross-species virus transmission [117]. A comparative analysis of
H1N1pdm and H1N1sw in the airway monolayer derived from organoids
also revealed a very high virus transmission potential. Even though the
viral titer of the basolateral medium was relatively low due to the

conﬁrming

epithelial barrier formed in the 2D monolayer and the preferential
release of virus from the apical side of cells, the human airway organoids
demonstrated differences in the replication capacity between viruses on
both the apical and basal sides.

COVID-19 is a contagious respiratory disease caused by infection with
a novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2). It can lead to fatal disorders, including severe pneumonia
[5]. To overcome the COVID-19 pandemic, a robust and practical in vitro
model system for SARS-CoV-2 virus etiology is necessary. Since
SARS-CoV-2 mainly infects the respiratory tract, lung organoids have
[118–122].
been most
extensively developed in recent years
SARS-CoV-2-infected lung organoids demonstrated that the expression of
serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) is essential for priming the spike (S) protein
of angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) of coronavirus. The entry
and replication of coronaviruses are effectively inhibited through pre-
treatment with Camostat, a serine protease inhibitor, conﬁrming
TMPRSS2 as the main entry route in vivo (Fig. 9A and B) [120]. In
addition, the high-throughput screening of lung organoids has enabled
the identiﬁcation of drugs inhibiting the entry of various coronaviruses
(Fig. 9C) [118]. In addition to the respiratory system, studies on
organoid-based coronavirus infections have been conducted for various
organs, including the stomach [45], small intestine [123,124], and ce-
rebrum [118], to develop models for understanding the pathogenesis of
COVID-19 and testing new therapeutic drugs.

Aspergillus fumigatus is the most important pathogenic fungus in
humans causing various lung diseases including allergic broncho-
pulmonary aspergillosis, chronic pulmonary aspergillosis and invasive
aspergillosis [125]. The infection of A. fumigatus led to upregulation of
stimulatory inﬂammatory cytokine expression through pathogen recog-
nition receptor in lung organoids, with expressions of tissue inﬂamma-
tion markers such as cyclooxygenase, matrix metalloproteinase 9, and the
acute-phase protein C-reactive proteins [126]. These results suggest that
the potential of microbe-co-cultured organoids models to mimic the
immune function and immunocompetent tissue microenvironment of
organs.

3.3. Nervous system

Zika virus, a mosquito-borne ﬂavivirus, causes birth defects including
microcephaly and is associated with meningitis and myelitis [34]. Zika
virus has been demonstrated to preferentially target neural progenitor
cells (NPCs) across the placenta [127,128], leading to cell death via

9

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

Fig. 9. SARS-CoV-2-infected lung organoids. Immunoﬂuorescence images of (A) bronchiolar and (B) bronchial organoids pretreated with Camostat [120]. (C) In-
hibition of SARS-CoV-2 infection by treatment with viral entry inhibitors [118].

apoptosis or autophagy by inducing the depletion of progenitors due to
premature differentiation of NPCs causing centromere perturbation.
Microcephaly results from ventricular region destruction, cortical dam-
age, and neurogenesis disorders [34,128,129]. Though the AXL receptor
has been increasingly considered as a major attachment factor for the
entry of Zika virus and NPC death, the role of AXL still remains elusive.
To understand the effect of AXL on Zika virus pathogenesis, a cerebral
organoid model capable of expressing AXL has been developed (Fig. 10A
and B) [130]. Nevertheless, another study described that AXL is not
essential for Zika virus infection in NPCs and organoids with genetically
excised AXL (Fig. 10C–E) [131]. As these results indicate, the inhibition
of AXL alone does not seem to be enough to ameliorate Zika virus
infection during brain tissue development. In addition, the inhibition of
the innate immune receptor toll-like receptor 3 reduced the phenotypic
effects of Zika virus infection [132]. Though preclinical studies on Zika
virus have not precisely identiﬁed drugs to treat or prevent the infection
[133,134], a screening using approximately 6000 compounds on brain
organoid models has identiﬁed the caspase-3 activity inhibitors,

Emricasan and Niclosamide, to be effective in inhibiting the death of
NPCs and proliferation of Zika virus [25]. Besides, a multi-well rotating
bioreactor SpinΩ was developed for the easy and cost-effective estab-
that allows brain
lishment of a Zika-infected organoid model
region-speciﬁc analysis [135]. In addition to Zika virus, pathogenic
mechanisms of various microbes, such as human immunodeﬁciency virus
and herpes simplex virus, have been studied using brain organoids [136,
137].

Toxoplasmosis is a parasitic disease that results from T. gondii infec-
tion; upon infection with T. gondii, it can penetrate to circulating cells
such as macrophages and cross the blood-brain-barrier [81,82]. It has
been reported that humans infected with T. gondii develop abnormal
neurocognitive behaviors and mental disorders. However, no drug has
been approved for Toxoplasmosis yet, and the study of T. gondii infection
in 2D models showed non-physiological pressures and tensions that can
alter processes of Toxoplasma infection [138]. To overcome these limi-
tations, T. gondii-infected cerebral organoids model was developed;
T. gondii formed a cyst-like structure within the organoid, and tachyzolite

Fig. 10. Zika virus-infected brain organoids. (A) Schematic illustration for generation of induced pluripotent stem cell-based cerebral organoids [130]. (B) Immu-
nohistochemistry image of AXL expression in the lumen of organoids after 70 weeks of culture [130]. (C) Bright-ﬁeld image of ZIKA-infected organoids for wild type
AXL (AXLWT) and transmembrane domain knocked-out AXL (AXLKO(cid:2)Tm) [131]. Quantiﬁed size of cross-sectional organoids at (D) 72 h and (E) 144 h
post-infection [131].

10

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

was differentiated into bradyzolite; thereby proving that it summarizes
the life cycle stages of the parasite [139]. In addition, in the cerebral
organoids, differentiated neuronal cells exhibited a higher priority than
radial glial cells for the infection of T. gondii.

3.4. Reproductive system

the mechanism still

Chlamydia trachomatis not only induces sexually transmitted diseases
but also causes chronic infections, fallopian tube scarring, and possible
infertility [140,141]. C. trachomatis has been shown to disrupt host cell
metabolism and cause DNA damage in vitro [142,143]. Several studies
have reported structural damage to the C. trachomatis-infection fallopian
[144]. The
tubes but
C.
trachomatis-infected fallopian tube organoids models have been
established to study the pathological relationship of C. trachomatis and
salpingitis [140,145]. In this model, C. trachomatis was mainly found in
the lumen of organoids, and the infection induced a change in the cell
composition of the organoid monolayer (Fig. 11A) [140]. In addition, the
adsorption of glutamine is critical for the synthesis of peptidoglycans that
play important roles in the proliferation of C. trachomatis; their prolif-
eration was inhibited in fallopian tube organoids, in which SLC1A5, a
glutamine transporter, was knocked out (Fig. 11B) [145].

remains unclear

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is one of the major causes of cervical
carcinogenesis [146–148]. Upon HPV infection, co-factors like immune
status, hormones, and co-infections are known to inﬂuence the devel-
opment of cervical cancer. To understand the interaction between HPV
and bacterial pathogen C. trachomatis, a co-infection model was devel-
oped via infection of C. trachomatis to the ectocervix organoid induced by
integration of E6E7 oncogene into the host genome [149]. The HPV E6E7
inhibited the redifferentiation of reticulate bodies into elementary
bodies, as well as interfered with C.
trachomatis development and
reduced persistence. The C. trachomatis suppressed mismatch repair gene
expression by proteasomal degradation of transcription factor E2F1.

These results suggest that the co-existence of HPV and C. trachomatis in
stem cells can promote cervical carcinogenesis and tumor progression.
Nevertheless, direct infection of HPV into organoids, not through direct
method such as genetic manipulation, has progressed only with oral
mucosal organoids [150]; no studies have been performed on repro-
ductive system organoids. Taken together, these approaches could be
potentially useful to elucidate the pathogenesis of various diseases of the
reproductive system, including serous ovarian cancer, the long-term ef-
fects of Chlamydial
infection, and co-infections with pathogenic
microbes.

3.5. Urinary system

Infection with BK virus, a tubule-speciﬁc virus, has no speciﬁc
treatment and is one of main causes of nephropathy and disability in
kidney transplant recipients [151]. Renal organoids infected with BK
virus demonstrated an infection pattern similar to that of nephrotic tis-
sue, and the nuclei of infected tubular cells double in size due to intra-
nuclear basophilic viral inclusions [152]. In addition, the expression of
an early gene of the BK virus, SV40/large T antigen, and a late gene VP-1
were detected in the BK virus-infected renal organoids (Fig. 12A).

SARS-CoV-2 infects and damages the cells of the kidney, an important
target organ for COVID-19, but the mechanism remains unclear [153].
Coronavirus-infected renal organoids models have been constructed to
identify the pathophysiological relevance; coronaviruses have been re-
ported to infect renal tubular epithelial cells and induce acute injury and
ﬁbrotic remodeling, leading to renal failure and chronic kidney disease
[154]. The SARS-CoV-2-infected renal organoids exhibited an upregu-
lation in the expression of ﬁbrosis-inducing collagen type I, and this
upregulation could be reduced by blocking TGF-β receptor I (Fig. 12B).
Further,
the administration of human recombinant soluble ACE2
(hrsACE2) to renal organoids suppressed viral infection and attenuated
the spread of the coronavirus (Fig. 12C) [155].

4. Concluding remarks

organoid co-cultures with pathogens

In this review, we have discussed the current advances in organoid co-
cultures for studying host-microbe interactions. Organoid models more
accurately mimic the human in vivo environment than previous con-
ventional culture systems, offering innovative and effective in vitro ap-
proaches. Therefore,
or
commensals, such as Salmonella, C. difﬁcile and viruses, have contributed
to a better understanding of previously inaccessible interactions between
tissues/cells and microbes [156,157]. However, the development of
organoids co-cultured with archaea, fungi, and protists are still relatively
elusive, compared to the counterpart of bacteria and viruses;
organoids-based co-culture studies on a wider range of microbe species
should be conducted.
the current
microbe-co-cultured organoids research focused on pathophysiological
studies, it is necessary to understand the physiological mechanism such
as immunity, metabolism, and hormone secretion in the human body and
the interaction with symbiotic bacteria through the organoid symbiosis
model. Further, the co-culture of organoids with helminth such as Nip-
postrongylus brasiliensism and Trichinella spirails can derive an in vitro
model for parasitism [158,159].

since most of

In addition,

When co-culturing organoids and microbes, a dedicate medium
recipe to address the requirement of both is necessary to establish the
microbe-co-cultured organoids due to the difference in optimal medium
composition for growth and maintenance between two counterparts, in
addition to an adequate selection of the co-culture architecture for
providing an environment similar to the microenvironment in the cor-
responding organs in vivo [29]. For example, most commensal bacteria in
intestine and colon are facultative or obligate anaerobes and can only
survive in an environment with minimal oxygen [160–162]. In order to

11

Fig. 11. C. trachomatis-infected fallopian tube organoids. (A) Whole-mount 3D
images for the localization of bacteria in acute C. trachomatis-infected organoids.
(C. trachomatis, red; β-catenin, green; nuclei, blue). Scale bar, 50 μm [140]. (B)
Immunoﬂuorescence images of C. trachomatis-infected organoids derived from
SLC1A5

and SLC1A5

mice [145].

þ/þ

(cid:2)/(cid:2)

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

Fig. 12. Virus-infected kidney organoids. (A) Histological images of periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-, SV40 T antigen (early gene of BK virus)- and VP-1 (late gene of BK
virus)-stained BK virus-infected tubuloids at 10 days post-infection. Black arrows indicate larger blue nuclei (intracellular basophilic viral inclusions) [152]. (B) Kidney
organoids without any treatment (R, mock-infected) or with treatment using SB431542 (S), SARS-CoV-2 (T) and SARS-CoV-2 þ SB431542 (U). Scale bar, 20 μm [154].
(C) Effect of human recombinant soluble ACE2 (hrsACE2) on SARS-CoV-2-infected kidney organoids [155].

provide speciﬁc culture conditions for these microbes, a culture system
equipped with a hypoxia gradient could make it possible to reproduce the
oxygen gradient in vivo [48]. In addition, the control for the number of
microbes per single organoid and the timing of microbe inoculation to
from
organoids
microbes-co-cultured organoids system-based applications.

could enable to obtain more uniform results

In addition to the studies of the organs mentioned above [35,43,64,
99,128,140,152,163,164], co-cultured organoids for other organs,
including the esophagus, eye, and blood vessel are increasingly being
studied [155,165–167]. Nevertheless, a reconceptualization of
the
principles of organoid design is required to maximize the applicability of
the organoid model [168]. In general, organoids are mostly composed of
epithelial and mesenchymal cells, which allows the advantageous feature
in obtaining data less relevant from the disturbance or interaction of
surrounding cells. However, though organoids grown in vitro are more
physiologically similar to human than 2D cell cultures, they exhibit
fetal-level maturity and function acceptably at various stages of devel-
opment in physiological studies [169,170]; they also failed to recapitu-
late in vivo tissue condition and organ systems due to a lack of immune

12

composition of Basement Membrane Extract

cells and vascular structures [170]. Moreover, access to the supply and
demand of primary tissues obtained through surgery or biopsy has been
becoming increasingly difﬁcult, restricting practical applications of
human tissue-derived organoids. Currently available commercial
induced pluripotent stem cells not only take a long time to generate
mature organoids, but also use enormous media and growth factors; more
basic research to identify the optimal conditions for organoid formation
is necessary to solve these problems. Meanwhile, the complex and un-
a
clear
tumor-derived ECM material used for the culture of most organoids, can
lead to uncertainty and errors in reproducibility in cell biology [171].
Several types of biopolymers, such as collagen, hyaluronic acid, and poly
(ethylene glycol), have been utilized as hydrogel formulations to replace
the BME, with the aim of reproducibly generating organoids [171–174].
Nevertheless, more advanced engineering approaches for the polymeric
hydrogels for controlling the stiffness, cell viability and bioactivity of the
environment required for microbial-host growth is highly needed.
Despite these limitations, organoids have been established as standard
their
tools

host-microbial

interactions

studying

(BME),

and

for

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

physiology/pathology [175]. Based on advances in organoid techniques,
such as organoids-on-a-chip [176]and assembloids [177], organoids
could become an unprecedented model for improving human health in
the future.

Credit author statement

Min Beom Kim: Conceptualization, Methodology,

Investigation,
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Soonho Hwangbo:
Writing – review & editing. Sung Ho Jang: Writing – review & editing.
Yun Kee Jo: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Supervision.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence
the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program
through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF)grant funded
by the Korea government, Ministry of Science and ICT (NRF-
2021R1C1C1008560).

References

[1] R. Knight, C. Callewaert, C. Marotz, E.R. Hyde, J.W. Debelius, D. McDonald,

M.L. Sogin, The microbiome and human biology, Annu. Rev. Genom. Hum. Genet.
18 (2017) 65–86, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genom-083115-022438.

[2] T. Nih, Human microbiome portfolio analysis, A review of 10 years of human

microbiome research activities at the US National Institutes of health, Fiscal Years
2007-2016, Microbiome 7 (2019) 31, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-019-0620-
y.

[3] M.A. Malla, A. Dubey, A. Kumar, S. Yadav, A. Hashem, E.F.A. Allah, Exploring the
human microbiome: the potential future role of next-generation sequencing in
disease diagnosis and treatment, Front. Immunol. 10 (2019) 2868, https://
doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2018.02868.

[4] A. Casadevall, L.A. Pirofski, Host-pathogen interactions: basic concepts of

microbial commensalism, colonization, infection, and disease, Infect. Immun. 68
(2000) 6511–6518, https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.68.12.6511-6518.2000.

[5] T. Singhal, A review of coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19), Indian J. Pediatr.

87 (2020) 281–286, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-020-03263-6.

[6] M. Campieri, P. Gionchetti, Bacteria as the cause of ulcerative colitis, Gut 48

(2001) 132–135, https://doi.org/10.1136/gut.48.1.132.

[7] C.J. Ramírez-Flores, L.J. Knoll, Breakthroughs in microbiology made possible with

organoids, PLoS Pathog. 17 (2021), e1010080, https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.ppat.1010080.

[8] R. Lehmann, C.M. Lee, E.C. Shugart, M. Benedetti, R.A. Charo, Z. Gartner,
B. Hogan, J. Knoblich, C.M. Nelson, K.M. Wilson, Human organoids: a new
dimension in cell biology, Mol. Biol. Cell 30 (2019) 1129–1137, https://doi.org/
10.1091/mbc.E19-03-0135.

[9] A. Mithal, A. Capilla, D. Heinze, A. Berical, C. Villacorta-Martin, M. Vedaie,

A. Jacob, K. Abo, A. Szymaniak, M. Peasley, A. Stuffer, J. Mahoney, D.N. Kotton,
F. Hawkins, G. Mostoslavsky, Generation of mesenchyme free intestinal organoids
from human induced pluripotent stem cells, Nat. Commun. 11 (2020) 215,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-13916-6.

[10] F. Liu, J. Huang, Z. Liu, Vincristine impairs microtubules and causes neurotoxicity
in cerebral organoids, Neuroscience 404 (2019) 530–540, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2018.12.047.

[11] A.J. Miller, B.R. Dye, D. Ferrer-Torres, D.R. Hill, A.W. Overeem, L.D. Shea,

J.R. Spence, Generation of lung organoids from human pluripotent stem cells in
vitro, Nat. Protoc. 14 (2019) 518–540, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-018-
0104-8.

[12] T.R. Broda, K.W. McCracken, J.M. Wells, Generation of human antral and fundic
gastric organoids from pluripotent stem cells, Nat. Protoc. 14 (2019) 28–50,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-018-0080-z.

[13] K. Duval, H. Grover, L.H. Han, Y. Mou, A.F. Pegoraro, J. Fredberg, Z. Chen,

Modeling physiological events in 2D vs. 3D cell culture, Physiology 32 (2017)
266–277, https://doi.org/10.1152/physiol.00036.2016.

[14] P.V. Turner, The role of the gut microbiota on animal model reproducibility,
Anim. Model. Exp. Med. 1 (2018) 109–115, https://doi.org/10.1002/
ame2.12022.

[15] A.D. Kostic, M.R. Howitt, W.S. Garrett, Exploring host-microbiota interactions in
animal models and humans, Genes Dev. 27 (2013) 701–718, https://doi.org/
10.1101/gad.212522.112.

[16] T. Hartung, Thoughts on limitations of animal models, Park. Relat. Disord. 14

(2008) 83–85, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2008.04.003.

13

[17] J. Barrila, A. Crabb(cid:1)e, J. Yang, K. Franco, S.D. Nydam, R.J. Forsyth, R.R. Davis,

S. Gangaraju, C. Mark Ott, C.B. Coyne, M.J. Bissell, C.A. Nickerson, Modeling host-
pathogen interactions in the context of the microenvironment: three-dimensional
cell culture comes of age, Infect. Immun. 86 (2018), e00282, https://doi.org/
10.1128/IAI.00282-18.

[18] S. Xia, M. Wu, S. Chen, T. Zhang, L. Ye, J. Liu, H. Li, Long term culture of human
kidney proximal tubule epithelial cells maintains lineage functions and serves as
an Ex vivo model for coronavirus associated kidney injury, Virol. Sin. 35 (2020)
311–320, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12250-020-00253-y.

[19] Y. Yin, M. Bijvelds, W. Dang, L. Xu, A.A. Van Der Eijk, K. Knipping, N. Tuysuz,
J.F. Dekkers, Y. Wang, J. De Jonge, D. Sprengers, L.J.W. Van Der Laan,
J.M. Beekman, D. Ten Berge, H.J. Metselaar, H. De Jonge, M.P.G. Koopmans,
M.P. Peppelenbosch, Q. Pan, Modeling rotavirus infection and antiviral therapy
using primary intestinal organoids, Antivir. Res. 123 (2015) 120–131, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2015.09.010.

[20] D. Dutta, I. Heo, H. Clevers, Disease modeling in stem cell-derived 3D organoid
systems, Trends Mol. Med. 23 (2017) 393–410, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.molmed.2017.02.007.

[21] P. Tiefenboeck, J.A. Kim, J.C. Leroux, Intracellular delivery of colloids: past and
future contributions from microinjection, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 132 (2018) 3–15,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2018.06.013.

[22] J.L. Forbester, D. Goulding, L. Vallier, N. Hannan, C. Hale, D. Pickard,

S. Mukhopadhyay, G. Dougan, Interaction of salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium with intestinal organoids derived from human induced pluripotent
stem cells, Infect. Immun. 83 (2015) 2926–2934, https://doi.org/10.1128/
IAI.00161-15.

[23] J.L. Leslie, S. Huang, J.S. Opp, M.S. Nagy, M. Kobayashi, V.B. Young, J.R. Spence,
Persistence and toxin production by Clostridium difﬁcile within human intestinal
organoids result in disruption of epithelial paracellular barrier function, Infect.
Immun. 83 (2015) 138–145, https://doi.org/10.1128/IAI.02561-14.

[24] S.S. Karve, S. Pradhan, D.V. Ward, A.A. Weiss, Intestinal organoids model human
responses to infection by commensal and Shiga toxin producing Escherichia coli,
PLoS One 12 (2017) 1–20, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0178966.
[25] M. Xu, E.M. Lee, Z. Wen, Y. Cheng, W.K. Huang, X. Qian, J. Tcw, J. Kouznetsova,

S.C. Ogden, C. Hammack, F. Jacob, H.N. Nguyen, M. Itkin, C. Hanna, P. Shinn,
C. Allen, S.G. Michael, A. Simeonov, W. Huang, K.M. Christian, A. Goate,
K.J. Brennand, R. Huang, M. Xia, G.L. Ming, W. Zheng, H. Song, H. Tang,
Identiﬁcation of small-molecule inhibitors of Zika virus infection and induced
neural cell death via a drug repurposing screen, Nat. Med. 22 (2016) 1101–1107,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.4184.

[26] Y. Zhang, L.C. Yu, Microinjection as a tool of mechanical delivery, Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 19 (2008) 506–510, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2008.07.005.

[27] M. Poletti, K. Arnauts, M. Ferrante, T. Korcsmaros, Organoid-based models to

study the role of host-microbiota interactions in IBD, J. Crohn’s Colitis. 15 (2021)
1222–1235, https://doi.org/10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjaa257.

[28] N.J. Ginga, R. Slyman, G.A. Kim, E. Parigoris, S. Huang, V.K. Yadagiri, V.B. Young,
J.R. Spence, S. Takayama, Perfusion system for modiﬁcation of luminal contents of
human intestinal organoids and realtime imaging analysis of microbial
populations, Micromachines 13 (2022) 131, https://doi.org/10.3390/
mi13010131.

[29] J. Puschhof, C. Pleguezuelos-Manzano, A. Martinez-Silgado, N. Akkerman,

A. Saftien, C. Boot, A. de Waal, J. Beumer, D. Dutta, I. Heo, H. Clevers, Intestinal
organoid cocultures with microbes, Nat. Protoc. 16 (2021) 4633–4649, https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41596-021-00589-z.

[30] L.N. Chen, X.Y. Fan, Y.T. Liu, S.Q. Chen, F.Y. Xie, L. Zeng, J. Wen, J. Li, J.Y. Ma,
X.H. Ou, S.M. Luo, L. Guo, High-survival rate after microinjection of mouse
oocytes and early embryos with mRNA by combining a tip pipette and
piezoelectric-assisted micromanipulator, Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9 (2021) 1–9,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2021.735971.

[31] I.A. Williamson, J.W. Arnold, L.A. Samsa, L. Gaynor, M. DiSalvo, J.L. Cocchiaro,
I. Carroll, M.A. Azcarate-Peril, J.F. Rawls, N.L. Allbritton, S.T. Magness, A high-
throughput organoid microinjection platform to study gastrointestinal microbiota
and luminal physiology, Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 6 (2018) 301–319,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2018.05.004.

[32] H.F. Farin, W.R. Karthaus, P. Kujala, M. Rakhshandehroo, G. Schwank,

R.G.J. Vries, E. Kalkhoven, E.E.S. Nieuwenhuis, H. Clevers, Paneth cell extrusion
and release of antimicrobial products is directly controlled by immune cell-
derived IFN-γ, J. Exp. Med. 211 (2014) 1393–1405, https://doi.org/10.1084/
jem.20130753.

[33] L. Huang, Q. Hou, L. Ye, Q. Yang, Q. Yu, Crosstalk between H9N2 avian inﬂuenza
virus and crypt-derived intestinal organoids, Vet. Res. 48 (2017) 71, https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13567-017-0478-6.

[34] E. Gabriel, A. Ramani, U. Karow, M. Gottardo, K. Natarajan, L.M. Gooi, G. Goranci-
Buzhala, O. Krut, F. Peters, M. Nikolic, S. Kuivanen, E. Korhonen, T. Smura,
O. Vapalahti, A. Papantonis, J. Schmidt-Chanasit, M. Riparbelli, G. Callaini,
M. Kr€onke, O. Uterm€ohlen, J. Gopalakrishnan, Recent zika virus isolates induce
premature differentiation of neural progenitors in human brain organoids, Cell
Stem Cell 20 (2017) 397–406, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016.12.005, e5.
[35] T. Scanu, R.M. Spaapen, J.M. Bakker, C.B. Pratap, L. en Wu, I. Hoﬂand, A. Broeks,
V.K. Shukla, M. Kumar, H. Janssen, J.Y. Song, E.A. Neefjes-Borst, H. te Riele,
D.W. Holden, G. Nath, J. Neefjes, Salmonella manipulation of host signaling
pathways provokes cellular transformation associated with gallbladder carcinoma,
Cell Host Microbe 17 (2015) 763–774, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.chom.2015.05.002.

[36] L. Helms, S. Marchiano, I.B. Stanaway, T.Y. Hsiang, B.A. Juliar, S. Saini, Y.T. Zhao,
A. Khanna, R. Menon, F. Alakwaa, C. Mikacenic, E.D. Morrell, M.M. Wurfel,

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

M. Kretzler, J.L. Harder, C.E. Murry, J. Himmelfarb, H. Ruohola-Baker,
P.K. Bhatraju, M. Gale, B.S. Freedman, Cross-validation of SARS-CoV-2 responses
in kidney organoids and clinical populations, JCI Insight 6 (2021), e154882,
https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.154882.

[37] J.Y. Co, M. Margalef-Catal(cid:3)a, X. Li, A.T. Mah, C.J. Kuo, D.M. Monack, M.R. Amieva,
Controlling epithelial polarity: a Human enteroid model for host-pathogen
interactions, Cell Rep. 26 (2019) 2509–2520, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.celrep.2019.01.108, e4.

[38] R. Dheer, V.B. Young, Stem-cell-derived models: tools for studying role of

microbiota in intestinal homeostasis and disease, Curr. Opin. Gastroenterol. 37
(2021) 15–22, https://doi.org/10.1097/MOG.0000000000000691.

[39] J.Y. Co, M. Margalef-Catal(cid:3)a, D.M. Monack, M.R. Amieva, Controlling the polarity
of human gastrointestinal organoids to investigate epithelial biology and
infectious diseases, Nat. Protoc. 16 (2021) 5171–5192, https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41596-021-00607-0.

[40] J.E. Wosen, A. Ilstad-Minnihan, J.Y. Co, W. Jiang, D. Mukhopadhyay,

N.Q. Fernandez-Becker, C.J. Kuo, M.R. Amieva, E.D. Mellins, Human intestinal
enteroids model MHC-II in the gut epithelium, Front. Immunol. 10 (2019) 1–8,
https://doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2019.01970.

[56] D.R. Hill, J.R. Spence, Gastrointestinal organoids: understanding the molecular
basis of the host–microbe interface, Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 3 (2017)
138–149, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2016.11.007.

[57] J. Rubert, P.J. Schweiger, F. Mattivi, K. Tuohy, K.B. Jensen, A. Lunardi, Intestinal
organoids: a tool for modelling diet–microbiome–host interactions, Trends
Endocrinol. Metabol. 31 (2020) 848–858, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.tem.2020.02.004.

[58] M. Breitbart, F. Rohwer, Here a virus, there a virus, everywhere the same virus?

Trends Microbiol. 13 (2005) 278–284, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.tim.2005.04.003.

[59] S.R. Finkbeiner, X.L. Zeng, B. Utama, R.L. Atmar, N.F. Shroyer, M.K. Estesa, Stem

cell-derived human intestinal organoids as an infection model for rotaviruses,
mBio 3 (2012), e00159-12, https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00159-12.
[60] K. Saxena, S.E. Blutt, K. Ettayebi, X.-L. Zeng, J.R. Broughman, S.E. Crawford,

U.C. Karandikar, N.P. Sastri, M.E. Conner, A.R. Opekun, D.Y. Graham, W. Qureshi,
V. Sherman, J. Foulke-Abel, J. In, O. Kovbasnjuk, N.C. Zachos, M. Donowitz,
M.K. Estes, Human intestinal enteroids: a new model to study human rotavirus
infection, host restriction, and pathophysiology, J. Virol. 90 (2016) 43–56,
https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.01930-15.

[41] Y. Wang, M. DiSalvo, D.B. Gunasekara, J. Dutton, A. Proctor, M.S. Lebhar,

[61] P.V.A. Fine, R.H. Ree, J.X. Becerra, R.J. Burnham, N.L. Carranco, M.N. De

I.A. Williamson, J. Speer, R.L. Howard, N.M. Smiddy, S.J. Bultman, C.E. Sims,
S.T. Magness, N.L. Allbritton, Self-renewing monolayer of primary colonic or
rectal epithelial cells, Cmgh 4 (2017) 165–182, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jcmgh.2017.02.011, e7.

[42] J. Zhang, V. Hernandez-Gordillo, M. Trapecar, C. Wright, M. Taketani,

K. Schneider, W.L.K. Chen, E. Stas, D.T. Breault, R.L. Carrier, C.A. Voigt,
L.G. Grifﬁth, Coculture of primary human colon monolayer with human gut
bacteria, Nat. Protoc. 16 (2021) 3874–3900, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596-
021-00562-w.

[43] J. In, J. Foulke-Abel, N.C. Zachos, A.M. Hansen, J.B. Kaper, H.D. Bernstein,

M. Halushka, S. Blutt, M.K. Estes, M. Donowitz, O. Kovbasnjuk,
Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli reduces mucus and intermicrovillar bridges in
human stem cell-derived colonoids, Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2 (2016)
48–62, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2015.10.001, e3.

[44] J.M. van Rijn, J. Eriksson, J. Grüttner, M. Sundbom, D.-L. Webb, P.M. Hellstr€om,
S.G. Sv€ard, M.E. Sellin, High-deﬁnition DIC imaging uncovers transient stages of
pathogen infection cycles on the surface of human adult stem cell-derived
intestinal epithelium, mBio 13 (2022), e0002222, https://doi.org/10.1128/
mbio.00022-22.

[45] G.G. Giobbe, F. Bonfante, B.C. Jones, O. Gagliano, C. Luni, E. Zambaiti, S. Perin,
C. Laterza, G. Busslinger, H. Stuart, M. Pagliari, A. Bortolami, E. Mazzetto,
A. Manfredi, C. Colantuono, L. Di Filippo, A.F. Pellegata, V. Panzarin, N. Thapar,
V.S.W. Li, S. Eaton, D. Cacchiarelli, H. Clevers, N. Elvassore, P. De Coppi, SARS-
CoV-2 infection and replication in human gastric organoids, Nat. Commun. 12
(2021) 6610, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26762-2.

[46] N. Wallaschek, S. Reuter, S. Silkenat, K. Wolf, C. Niklas, €O. Kayisoglu, C. Aguilar,
A. Wiegering, C.T. Germer, S. Kircher, A. Rosenwald, C. Shannon-Lowe,
S. Bartfeld, Ephrin receptor A2, the epithelial receptor for Epstein-Barr virus entry,
is not available for efﬁcient infection in human gastric organoids, PLoS Pathog. 17
(2021), e1009210, https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.PPAT.1009210.
[47] A. Iftekhar, H. Berger, N. Bouznad, J. Heuberger, F. Boccellato, U. Dobrindt,

H. Hermeking, M. Sigal, T.F. Meyer, Genomic aberrations after short-term
exposure to colibactin-producing E. coli transform primary colon epithelial cells,
Nat. Commun. 12 (2021) 1003, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-21162-y.

[48] N. Sasaki, K. Miyamoto, K.M. Maslowski, H. Ohno, T. Kanai, T. Sato, Development

of a scalable coculture system for gut anaerobes and human colon epithelium,
Gastroenterology 159 (2020) 388–390, https://doi.org/10.1053/
j.gastro.2020.03.021, e5.

[49] R. Kim, P.J. Attayek, Y. Wang, K.L. Furtado, R. Tamayo, C.E. Sims, N.L. Allbritton,
An in vitro intestinal platform with a self-sustaining oxygen gradient to study the
human gut/microbiome interface, Biofabrication 12 (2020), 015006, https://
doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/ab446e.

[50] H.J. Kim, H. Li, J.J. Collins, D.E. Ingber, Contributions of microbiome and

mechanical deformation to intestinal bacterial overgrowth and inﬂammation in a
human gut-on-a-chip, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113 (2016), https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.1522193112. E7–E15.

[51] H.J. Kim, D. Huh, G. Hamilton, D.E. Ingber, Human gut-on-a-chip inhabited by
microbial ﬂora that experiences intestinal peristalsis-like motions and ﬂow, Lab
Chip 12 (2012) 2165–2174, https://doi.org/10.1039/c2lc40074j.

[52] M. Kasendra, A. Tovaglieri, A. Sontheimer-Phelps, S. Jalili-Firoozinezhad, A. Bein,

A. Chalkiadaki, W. Scholl, C. Zhang, H. Rickner, C.A. Richmond, H. Li,
D.T. Breault, D.E. Ingber, Development of a primary human small Intestine-on-a-
chip using biopsy-derived organoids, Sci. Rep. 8 (2018) 2871, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-018-21201-7.

[53] J.R. Spence, C.N. Mayhew, S.A. Rankin, M.F. Kuhar, J.E. Vallance, K. Tolle,

E.E. Hoskins, V.V. Kalinichenko, S.I. Wells, A.M. Zorn, N.F. Shroyer, J.M. Wells,
Directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into intestinal tissue in
vitro, Nature 470 (2011) 105–110, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09691.
[54] H.C.K. Angus, A.G. Butt, M. Schultz, R.A. Kemp, Intestinal organoids as a tool for
inﬂammatory bowel disease research, Front. Med. 6 (2020) 1–9, https://doi.org/
10.3389/fmed.2019.00334.

[55] M. Idris, M.M. Alves, R.M.W. Hofstra, M.M. Mahe, V. Melotte, Intestinal

multicellular organoids to study colorectal cancer, Biochim. Biophys. Acta Rev.
Canc (2021), 188586, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbcan.2021.188586, 1876.

Cobertura, L.P. De Queiroz, S. Dry, R.T. Pennington, G.P. Lewis, J.A. Ratter,
B. Raton, J. Rzedowski, G.C. De Rzedowski, R.T. Pennington, G.P. Lewis,
J.A. Ratter, B. Raton, C.E. Hughes, R.T. Pennington, A. Antonelli, I. Trejo, R. Dirzo,
S. Bridgewater, J.A. Ratter, J.F. Ribeiro, D.M. Neves, K.G. Dexter, R.T. Pennington,
M.L. Bueno, L. Joppa, C. Seasonally, S. Programme, C.N. De Investigaciones,
I. Huamantupa, C. Reynel, S. Palacios, N. Agraria, L. Molina, A. La Molina,
B. Horizonte, M. Gerais, S. Isidro, S. National, W.L. Dock, C. Avenue, L. Hechicera,
Replication of human noroviruses in stem cell–derived human enteroids, Science
353 (2016) 1387–1394, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf5211.

[62] K. Pervolaraki, M.L. Stanifer, S. Münchau, L.A. Renn, D. Albrecht, S. Kurzhals,

E. Senís, D. Grimm, J. Schr€oder-Braunstein, R.L. Rabin, S. Boulant, Type I and type
III interferons display different dependency on mitogen-activated protein kinases
to mount an antiviral state in the human gut, Front. Immunol. 8 (2017) 459,
https://doi.org/10.3389/ﬁmmu.2017.00459.

[63] M.E. Ohl, S.I. Miller, Salmonella: a model for bacterial pathogenesis, Annu. Rev.
Med. 52 (2001) 259–274, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.med.52.1.259.

[64] S.S. Wilson, A. Tocchi, M.K. Holly, W.C. Parks, J.G. Smith, A small intestinal
organoid model of non-invasive enteric pathogen–epithelial cell interactions,
Mucosal Immunol. 8 (2015) 352–361, https://doi.org/10.1038/mi.2014.72.

[65] J.L. Forbester, E.A. Lees, D. Goulding, S. Forrest, A. Yeung, A. Speak, S. Clare,
E.L. Coomber, S. Mukhopadhyay, J. Kraiczy, F. Schreiber, T.D. Lawley,
R.E.W. Hancock, H.H. Uhlig, M. Zilbauer, F. Powrie, G. Dougan, Interleukin-22
promotes phagolysosomal fusion to induce protection against Salmonella enterica
Typhimurium in human epithelial cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115 (2018)
10118–10123, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1811866115.

[66] E.A. Lees, J.L. Forbester, S. Forrest, L. Kane, D. Goulding, G. Dougan, Using human

induced pluripotent stem cell-derived intestinal organoids to study and modify
epithelial cell protection against Salmonella and other pathogens, JoVE 2019
(2019), https://doi.org/10.3791/59478.

[67] Y.G. Zhang, S. Wu, Y. Xia, J. Sun, Salmonella-infected crypt-derived intestinal
organoid culture system for host–bacterial interactions, Phys. Rep. 2 (2014),
e12147, https://doi.org/10.14814/phy2.12147.

[68] M.A. Engevik, M.B. Yacyshyn, K.A. Engevik, J. Wang, B. Darien, D.J. Hassett,

B.R. Yacyshyn, R.T. Worrell, Human Clostridium difﬁcile infection: altered mucus
production and composition, Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 308
(2014) G510–G524, https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpgi.00091.2014.

[69] E. Chaves-Olarte, M. Weidmann, C. Von Eichel-Streiber, M. Thelestam, Toxins A
and B from Clostridium difﬁcile differ with respect to enzymatic potencies, cellular
substrate speciﬁcities, and surface binding to cultured cells, J. Clin. Invest. 100
(1997) 1734–1741, https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI119698.

[70] M. Riegler, R. Sedivy, C. Pothoulakis, G. Hamilton, J. Zacherl, G. Bischof,

E. Cosentini, W. Feil, R. Schiessel, J.T. LaMont, E. Wenzl, Clostridium difﬁcile toxin
B is more potent than toxin A in damaging human colonic epithelium in vitro,
J. Clin. Invest. 95 (1995) 2004–2011, https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI117885.
[71] R.N. Pruitt, N.M. Chumbler, S.A. Rutherford, M.A. Farrow, D.B. Friedman,
B. Spiller, D.B. Lacy, Structural determinants of Clostridium difﬁcile toxin a
glucosyltransferase activity, J. Biol. Chem. 287 (2012) 8013–8020, https://
doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.298414.

[72] Y.S. Son, S.J. Ki, R. Thanavel, J.J. Kim, M.O. Lee, J. Kim, C.R. Jung, T.S. Han,

H.S. Cho, C.M. Ryu, S.H. Kim, D.S. Park, M.Y. Son, Maturation of human intestinal
organoids in vitro facilitates colonization by commensal lactobacilli by reinforcing
the mucus layer, Faseb. J. 34 (2020) 9899–9910, https://doi.org/10.1096/
fj.202000063R.

[73] Q. Hou, L. Ye, H. Liu, L. Huang, Q. Yang, J. Turner, Q. Yu, Lactobacillus accelerates
ISCs regeneration to protect the integrity of intestinal mucosa through activation
of STAT3 signaling pathway induced by LPLs secretion of IL-22, Cell Death Differ.
25 (2018) 1657–1670, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41418-018-0070-2.

[74] D.R. Hill, S. Huang, M.S. Nagy, V.K. Yadagiri, C. Fields, D. Mukherjee, B. Bons,

P.H. Dedhia, A.M. Chin, Y.H. Tsai, S. Thodla, T.M. Schmidt, S. Walk, V.B. Young,
J.R. Spence, Bacterial colonization stimulates a complex physiological response in
the immature human intestinal epithelium, Elife 6 (2017), e29132, https://
doi.org/10.7554/eLife.29132.

[75] S.A. Shafﬁey, H. Jia, T. Keane, C. Costello, D. Wasserman, M. Quidgley, J. Dziki,
S. Badylak, C.P. Sodhi, J.C. March, D.J. Hackam, Intestinal stem cell growth and
differentiation on a tubular scaffold with evaluation in small and large animals,
Regen. Med. 11 (2016) 45–61, https://doi.org/10.2217/rme.15.70.

14

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

[76] X. Lu, S. Xie, L. Ye, L. Zhu, Q. Yu, Lactobacillus protects against

[93] M.F. Yuen, D.S. Chen, G.M. Dusheiko, H.L.A. Janssen, D.T.Y. Lau, S.A. Locarnini,

S. Typhimurium–Induced intestinal inﬂammation by determining the fate of
epithelial proliferation and differentiation, Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 64 (2020),
e1900655, https://doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.201900655.

[77] H. Wu, S. Xie, J. Miao, Y. Li, Z. Wang, M. Wang, Q. Yu, Lactobacillus reuteri
maintains intestinal epithelial regeneration and repairs damaged intestinal
mucosa, Gut Microb. 11 (2020) 997–1014, https://doi.org/10.1080/
19490976.2020.1734423.

[78] S. Pradhan, A.A. Weiss, Probiotic properties of Escherichia coli nissle in human

intestinal organoids, mBio 11 (2020), e01470-20, https://doi.org/10.1128/
mBio.01470-20.

[79] K.L. VanDussen, J.M. Marinshaw, N. Shaikh, H. Miyoshi, C. Moon, P.I. Tarr,
M.A. Ciorba, T.S. Stappenbeck, Development of an enhanced human
gastrointestinal epithelial culture system to facilitate patient-based assays, Gut 64
(2015) 911–920, https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2013-306651.

[80] C. Klotz, T. Aebischer, F. Seeber, Stem cell-derived cell cultures and organoids for
protozoan parasite propagation and studying host-parasite interaction, Int. J. Med.
Microbiol. 302 (2012) 203–209, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmm.2012.07.010.

[81] J. Flegr, Inﬂuence of latent Toxoplasma infection on human personality,

physiology and morphology: pros and cons of the Toxoplasma-human model in
studying the manipulation hypothesis, J. Exp. Biol. 216 (2013) 127–133, https://
doi.org/10.1242/jeb.073635.

[82] S.K. Matta, N. Rinkenberger, I.R. Dunay, L.D. Sibley, Toxoplasma gondii infection

and its implications within the central nervous system, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 19
(2021) 467–480, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-021-00518-7.

[83] J. Kunstler, Giardia lamblia: review of current diagnostic strategies, Population

(Paris) 12 (2019), https://doi.org/10.22037/ghfbb.0i0.1414, 3–12.

[84] D. Holthaus, E. Delgado-Betancourt, T. Aebischer, F. Seeber, C. Klotz,

Harmonization of protocols for multi-species organoid platforms to study the
intestinal biology of Toxoplasma gondii and other Protozoan infections, Front. Cell.
Infect. Microbiol. 10 (2021), 610368, https://doi.org/10.3389/
fcimb.2020.610368.

[85] C. Pleguezuelos-Manzano, J. Puschhof, A. Rosendahl Huber, A. van Hoeck,

H.M. Wood, J. Nomburg, C. Gurjao, F. Manders, G. Dalmasso, P.B. Stege,
F.L. Paganelli, M.H. Geurts, J. Beumer, T. Mizutani, Y. Miao, R. van der Linden,
S. van der Elst, J.C. Ambrose, P. Arumugam, E.L. Baple, M. Bleda, F. Boardman-
Pretty, J.M. Boissiere, C.R. Boustred, H. Brittain, M.J. Caulﬁeld, G.C. Chan,
C.E.H. Craig, L.C. Daugherty, A. de Burca, A. Devereau, G. Elgar, R.E. Foulger,
T. Fowler, P. Furi(cid:1)o-Tarí, J.M. Hackett, D. Halai, A. Hamblin, S. Henderson,
J.E. Holman, T.J.P. Hubbard, K. Ib(cid:1)a~nez, R. Jackson, L.J. Jones, D. Kasperaviciute,
M. Kayikci, L. Lahnstein, L. Lawson, S.E.A. Leigh, I.U.S. Leong, F.J. Lopez,
F. Maleady-Crowe, J. Mason, E.M. McDonagh, L. Moutsianas, M. Mueller,
N. Murugaesu, A.C. Need, C.A. Odhams, C. Patch, D. Perez-Gil,
D. Polychronopoulos, J. Pullinger, T. Rahim, A. Rendon, P. Riesgo-Ferreiro,
T. Rogers, M. Ryten, K. Savage, K. Sawant, R.H. Scott, A. Siddiq, A. Sieghart,
D. Smedley, K.R. Smith, A. Sosinsky, W. Spooner, H.E. Stevens, A. Stuckey,
R. Sultana, E.R.A. Thomas, S.R. Thompson, C. Tregidgo, A. Tucci, E. Walsh,
S.A. Watters, M.J. Welland, E. Williams, K. Witkowska, S.M. Wood, M. Zarowiecki,
K.C. Garcia, J. Top, R.J.L. Willems, M. Giannakis, R. Bonnet, P. Quirke,
M. Meyerson, E. Cuppen, R. van Boxtel, H. Clevers, Mutational signature in
colorectal cancer caused by genotoxic pks þ E. coli, Nature 580 (2020) 269–273,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2080-8.

[86] A. Klijn, A. Mercenier, F. Arigoni, Lessons from the genomes of biﬁdobacteria,

FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 29 (2005) 491–509, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.femsre.2005.04.010.

[87] L.B. Eltayeb, D. Shams, N. Babikr, M. Madani, S. Abdelghani, H.A. Waggiallah,

Serum levels of interferon gamma INF-γ and interleukin 10 il-10: an
immunological aspect among irritable bowel syndrome patients, Pakistan J. Biol.
Sci. 23 (2020) 898–903, https://doi.org/10.3923/pjbs.2020.898.903.
[88] V. Langer, E. Vivi, D. Regensburger, T.H. Winkler, M.J. Waldner, T. Rath,

B. Schmid, L. Skottke, S. Lee, N.L. Jeon, T. Wohlfahrt, V. Kramer, P. Tripal,
M. Schumann, S. Kersting, C. Handtrack, C.I. Geppert, K. Suchowski, R.H. Adams,
C. Becker, A. Ramming, E. Naschberger, N. Britzen-Laurent, M. Stürzl, IFN-γ drives
inﬂammatory bowel disease pathogenesis through VE-cadherin–directed vascular
barrier disruption, J. Clin. Invest. 129 (2019) 4691–4707, https://doi.org/
10.1172/JCI124884.

[89] X. Han, A. Lee, S. Huang, J. Gao, J.R. Spence, C. Owyang, Lactobacillus rhamnosus
GG prevents epithelial barrier dysfunction induced by interferon-gamma and fecal
supernatants from irritable bowel syndrome patients in human intestinal enteroids
and colonoids, Gut Microb. 10 (2019) 59–76, https://doi.org/10.1080/
19490976.2018.1479625.

[90] K.A.A. Caetano, F.P.R. Bergamaschi, M.A.S. Carneiro, R.S. Pinheiro, L.A. Araújo,
M.A. Matos, P.M.R.S. Carvalho, M.M. De Souza, M.A.D. De Matos, N.H.A. Del-Rios,
R.M.B. Martins, A.R.C. Motta-Castro, C.C. Soares, R.L. Cook, S.A. Teles,
Hepatotropic viruses (hepatitis A, B, C, D and E) in a rural Brazilian population:
prevalence, genotypes, risk factors and vaccination, Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg.
114 (2020) 91–98, https://doi.org/10.1093/trstmh/trz080.

[91] P. Kar, R. Karna, A review of the diagnosis and management of hepatitis E, Curr.
Treat. Options Infect. Dis. 12 (2020) 310–320, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40506-
020-00235-4, 10.1007/s40506-020-00235-4.

[92] P. Li, Y. Li, Y. Wang, J. Liu, M. Lavrijsen, Y. Li, R. Zhang, M.M.A. Verstegen,

Y. Wang, T.C. Li, Z. Ma, D.E. Kainov, M.J. Bruno, R.A. de Man, L.J.W. van der
Laan, M.P. Peppelenbosch, Q. Pan, Recapitulating hepatitis E virus-host
interactions and facilitating antiviral drug discovery in human liver-derived
organoids, Sci. Adv. 8 (2022), eabj5308, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abj5908.

M.G. Peters, C.L. Lai, Hepatitis B virus infection, Nat. Rev. Dis. Prim. 4 (2018),
18036, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2018.35.

[94] Y.Z. Nie, Y.W. Zheng, K. Miyakawa, S. Murata, R.R. Zhang, K. Sekine, Y. Ueno,
T. Takebe, T. Wakita, A. Ryo, H. Taniguchi, Recapitulation of hepatitis B
virus–host interactions in liver organoids from human induced pluripotent stem
cells, EBioMedicine 35 (2018) 114–123, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ebiom.2018.08.014.

[95] E. De Crignis, F. Caroﬁglio, P. Moulos, M.M.A. Verstegen, S. Romal, M.M. Khalid,
F. Pourfarzad, C. Koutsothanassis, H. Gehart, T.W. Kan, R.J. Palstra, C. Boucher,
J.M.N. Ijzermans, M. Huch, S.F. Boj, R. Vries, H. Clevers, L. van der Laan,
P. Hatzis, T. Mahmoudi, Application of human liver organoids as a patient-derived
primary model for HBV infection and related hepatocellular carcinoma, bioRxiv
10 (2019), e60747, https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.60747.

[96] S. Wen, S.F. Moss, Helicobacter pylori virulence factors in gastric carcinogenesis,
Cancer Lett. 282 (2009) 1–8, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2008.11.016.

[97] R.M. Peek, M.J. Blaser, Pathophysiology of Helicobacter pylori-induced gastritis

and peptic ulcer disease, Am. J. Med. 102 (1997) 200–207, https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0002-9343(96)00273-2.

[98] S. Bartfeld, T. Bayram, M. Van De Wetering, M. Huch, H. Begthel, P. Kujala,

R. Vries, P.J. Peters, H. Clevers, In vitro expansion of human gastric epithelial stem
cells and their responses to bacterial infection, Gastroenterology 148 (2015)
126–136, https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2014.09.042, e6.

[99] K.W. McCracken, E.M. Cat(cid:1)a, C.M. Crawford, K.L. Sinagoga, M. Schumacher,

B.E. Rockich, Y.H. Tsai, C.N. Mayhew, J.R. Spence, Y. Zavros, J.M. Wells,
Modelling human development and disease in pluripotent stem-cell-derived
gastric organoids, Nature 516 (2014) 400–404, https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature13863.

[100] N. Bertaux-Skeirik, R. Feng, M.A. Schumacher, J. Li, M.M. Mahe, A.C. Engevik,

J.E. Javier, R.M. Peek, K. Ottemann, V. Orian-Rousseau, G.P. Boivin,
M.A. Helmrath, Y. Zavros, CD44 Plays a Functional role in Helicobacter pylori-
induced epithelial cell proliferation, PLoS Pathog. 11 (2015) 1–24, https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1004663.

[101] M.A. Schumacher, R. Feng, E. Aihara, A.C. Engevik, M.H. Montrose,

K.M. Ottemann, Y. Zavros, Helicobacter pylori-induced sonic hedgehog expression
is regulated by NFjB pathway activation: the use of a novel in vitro model to study
epithelial response to infection, Helicobacter 20 (2015) 19–28, https://doi.org/
10.1111/hel.12152.

[102] J.Y. Huang, E.G. Sweeney, M. Sigal, H.C. Zhang, S.J. Remington, M.A. Cantrell,

C.J. Kuo, K. Guillemin, M.R. Amieva, Chemodetection and destruction of host urea
allows Helicobacter pylori to locate the epithelium, Cell Host Microbe 18 (2015)
147–156, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2015.07.002.

[103] K. Hashi, C. Imai, K. Yahara, K. Tahmina, T. Hayashi, T. Azuma, T. Miyabe-

Nishiwaki, H. Sato, M. Matsuoka, S. Niimi, M. Okamoto, M. Hatakeyama,
Evaluating the origin and virulence of a Helicobacter pylori cagA-positive strain
isolated from a non-human primate, Sci. Rep. 8 (2018), 15981, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-018-34425-4.

[104] I.I. Wistuba, A.F. Gazdar, Gallbladder cancer: lessons from a rare tumour, Nat. Rev.

Cancer 4 (2004) 695–706, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrc1429.

[105] L.P. Sepe, K. Hartl, A. Lftekhar, H. Berger, N. Kumar, C. Goosmann, S. Chopra,

S.C. Schmidt, R.K. Gurumurthy, T.F. Meyer, F. Boccellato, Genotoxic effect of
Salmonella Paratyphi A infection on human primary gallbladder cells, mBio 11
(2020) e01911–e01920, https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.01911-20.

[106] Q. Chai, Y. Zhang, C.H. Liu, Mycobacterium tuberculosis: an adaptable pathogen

associated with multiple human diseases, Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 8 (2018)
158, https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2018.00158.

[107] K. To, R. Cao, A. Yegiazaryan, J. Owens, V. Venketaraman, General overview of
Nontuberculous mycobacteria opportunistic pathogens: Mycobacterium avium and
mycobacterium abscessus, J. Clin. Med. 9 (2020) 2541, https://doi.org/10.3390/
jcm9082541.

[108] N. Iakobachvili, S.A. Leon-Icaza, K. Knoops, N. Sachs, S. Maz(cid:3)eres, R. Simeone,

A. Peixoto, C. Bernard, M. Murris-Espin, J. Mazi(cid:3)eres, K. Cam, C. Chalut, C. Guilhot,
C. L(cid:1)opez-Iglesias, R.B.G. Ravelli, O. Neyrolles, E. Meunier, G. Lugo-Villarino,
H. Clevers, C. Cougoule, P.J. Peters, Mycobacteria–host interactions in human
bronchiolar airway organoids, Mol. Microbiol. 117 (2022) 682–692, https://
doi.org/10.1111/mmi.14824.

[109] L.M. Palermo, M. Uppal, L. Skrabanek, P. Zumbo, S. Germer, N.C. Toussaint,

B.K. Rima, D. Huey, S. Niewiesk, M. Porotto, A. Moscona, Features of circulating
parainﬂuenza virus required for growth in human airway, mBio 7 (2016), e00235,
https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00235-16.

[110] A. Lewandowska-Polak, M. Brauncajs, E. Paradowska, M. Jarzebska, M. Kurowski,

S. Moskwa, Z.J. Lesnikowski, M.L. Kowalski, Human parainﬂuenza virus type 3
(HPIV3) induces production of IFNγ and RANTES in human nasal epithelial cells
(HNECs), J. Inﬂamm. 12 (2015) 16, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12950-015-0054-7.

[111] M. Porotto, M. Ferren, Y.-W. Chen, Y. Siu, N. Makhsous, B. Rima, T. Briese,
A.L. Greninger, H.-W. Snoeck, A. Mosconaa, Authentic modeling of human
respiratory virus infection in human pluripotent stem cell-derived lung organoids,
mBio 10 (2019), e00923-19, https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00723-19.
[112] I.N. Mammas, S.B. Drysdale, B. Rath, M. Theodoridou, G. Papaioannou,

A. Papatheodoropoulou, E. Koutsounaki, C. Koutsaftiki, E. Kozanidou,
V. Achtsidis, P. Korovessi, G.P. Chrousos, D.A. Spandidos, Update on current views
and advances on RSV infection (Review), Int. J. Mol. Med. 46 (2020) 509–520,
https://doi.org/10.3892/ijmm.2020.4641.

[113] T.J. Harford, F. Rezaee, B.R. Dye, J. Fan, J.R. Spence, G. Piedimonte, RSV-induced

changes in a 3-dimensional organoid model of human fetal lungs, PLoS One 17
(2022), e0265094, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265094.

15

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

[114] J.E. Johnson, R.A. Gonzales, S.J. Olson, P.F. Wright, B.S. Graham, The

histopathology of fatal untreated human respiratory syncytial virus infection,
Mod. Pathol. 20 (2007) 108–119, https://doi.org/10.1038/modpathol.3800725.

[115] Y.W. Chen, S.X. Huang, A.L.R.T. De Carvalho, S.H. Ho, M.N. Islam, S. Volpi,
L.D. Notarangelo, M. Ciancanelli, J.L. Casanova, J. Bhattacharya, A.F. Liang,
L.M. Palermo, M. Porotto, A. Moscona, H.W. Snoeck, A three-dimensional model
of human lung development and disease from pluripotent stem cells, Nat. Cell Biol.
19 (2017) 542–549, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb3510.

[116] M. Zhang, M. Liu, S. Bai, C. Zhao, Z. Li, J. Xu, X. Zhang, Inﬂuenza A virus–host
speciﬁcity: an ongoing cross-talk between viral and host factors, Front. Microbiol.
12 (2021), 777885, https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2021.777885.

[117] J. Zhou, C. Li, N. Sachs, M.C. Chiu, B.H.Y. Wong, H. Chu, V.K.M. Poon, D. Wang,
X. Zhao, L. Wen, W. Song, S. Yuan, K.K.Y. Wong, J.F.W. Chan, K.K.W. To, H. Chen,
H. Clevers, K.Y. Yuen, Differentiated human airway organoids to assess infectivity
of emerging inﬂuenza virus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115 (2018) 6822–6827,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1806308115.

[118] S.K. Tiwari, S. Wang, D. Smith, A.F. Carlin, T.M. Rana, Revealing tissue-Speciﬁc
SARS-CoV-2 infection and host responses using human stem cell-derived lung and
cerebral organoids, Stem Cell Rep. 16 (2021) 437–445, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.stemcr.2021.02.005.

[119] A.A. Salahudeen, S.S. Choi, A. Rustagi, J. Zhu, V. van Unen, S.M. de la O,

R.A. Flynn, M. Margalef-Catal(cid:3)a, A.J.M. Santos, J. Ju, A. Batish, T. Usui,
G.X.Y. Zheng, C.E. Edwards, L.E. Wagar, V. Luca, B. Anchang, M. Nagendran,
K. Nguyen, D.J. Hart, J.M. Terry, P. Belgrader, S.B. Ziraldo, T.S. Mikkelsen,
P.B. Harbury, J.S. Glenn, K.C. Garcia, M.M. Davis, R.S. Baric, C. Sabatti,
M.R. Amieva, C.A. Blish, T.J. Desai, C.J. Kuo, Progenitor identiﬁcation and SARS-
CoV-2 infection in human distal lung organoids, Nature 588 (2020) 670–675,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-3014-1.

[120] A.Z. Mykytyn, T.I. Breugem, S. Riesebosch, D. Schipper, P.B. van den Doel,

R.J. Rottier, M.M. Lamers, B.L. Haagmans, SARS-CoV-2 entry into human airway
organoids is serine protease-mediated and facilitated by the multibasic cleavage
site, Elife 10 (2021), e64508, https://doi.org/10.7554/ELIFE.64508.
[121] M.M. Lamers, T.I. Breugem, A.Z. Mykytyn, Y. Wang, N. Groen, K. Knoops,

D. Schipper, J. van der Vaart, C.D. Koopman, J. Zhang, D.C. Wu, P.B. van den Doel,
T. Bestebroer, C.H. GeurtsvanKessel, P.J. Peters, M.J. Muraro, H. Clevers, N.C. Wu,
B.L. Haagmans, Human organoid systems reveal in vitro correlates of ﬁtness for
SARS-CoV-2 B.1.1.7, BioRxiv (2021), 2021.05.03.441080, https://www.biorxiv.
org/content/10.1101/2021.05.03.441080v1%0Ahttps://www.biorxiv.org/conte
nt/10.1101/2021.05.03.441080v1.abstract.

[122] Y. Han, X. Duan, L. Yang, B.E. Nilsson-Payant, P. Wang, F. Duan, X. Tang,

T.M. Yaron, T. Zhang, S. Uhl, Y. Bram, C. Richardson, J. Zhu, Z. Zhao,
D. Redmond, S. Houghton, D.H.T. Nguyen, D. Xu, X. Wang, J. Jessurun,
A. Borczuk, Y. Huang, J.L. Johnson, Y. Liu, J. Xiang, H. Wang, L.C. Cantley,
B.R. tenOever, D.D. Ho, F.C. Pan, T. Evans, H.J. Chen, R.E. Schwartz, S. Chen,
Identiﬁcation of SARS-CoV-2 inhibitors using lung and colonic organoids, Nature
589 (2021) 270–275, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2901-9.

[123] J. Zhou, C. Li, X. Liu, M.C. Chiu, X. Zhao, D. Wang, Y. Wei, A. Lee, A.J. Zhang,
H. Chu, J.P. Cai, C.C.Y. Yip, I.H.Y. Chan, K.K.Y. Wong, O.T.Y. Tsang, K.H. Chan,
J.F.W. Chan, K.K.W. To, H. Chen, K.Y. Yuen, Infection of bat and human intestinal
organoids by SARS-CoV-2, Nat. Med. 26 (2020) 1077–1083, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41591-020-0912-6.

[124] J. Krüger, R. Groß, C. Conzelmann, J.A. Müller, L. Koepke, K.M.J. Sparrer, T. Weil,
D. Schütz, T. Seufferlein, T.F.E. Barth, S. Stenger, S. Heller, J. Münch, A. Kleger,
Drug inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 replication in human pluripotent stem cell–derived
intestinal organoids, Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 11 (2021) 935–948,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2020.11.003.

[125] F. Lamoth, Aspergillus fumigatus-related species in clinical practice, Front.

Microbiol. 7 (2016) 638, https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.00683.
[126] S.S. Jose, M. De Zuani, F. Tidu, M. Hortov(cid:1)a Kohoutkov(cid:1)a, L. Pazzagli, G. Forte,

R. Spaccapelo, T. Zelante, J. Fri(cid:4)c, Comparison of two human organoid models of
lung and intestinal inﬂammation reveals Toll-like receptor signalling activation
and monocyte recruitment, Clin. Transl. Immunol. 9 (2020) e1131, https://
doi.org/10.1002/cti2.1131.

[127] H. Tang, C. Hammack, S.C. Ogden, Z. Wen, X. Qian, Y. Li, B. Yao, J. Shin, F. Zhang,
E.M. Lee, K.M. Christian, R.A. Didier, P. Jin, H. Song, G.L. Ming, Zika virus infects
human cortical neural progenitors and attenuates their growth, Cell Stem Cell 18
(2016) 587–590, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016.02.016.

[128] F.R. Cugola, I.R. Fernandes, F.B. Russo, B.C. Freitas, J.L.M. Dias, K.P. Guimar~aes,

C. Benazzato, N. Almeida, G.C. Pignatari, S. Romero, C.M. Polonio, I. Cunha,
C.L. Freitas, W.N. Branda~o, C. Rossato, D.G. Andrade, D.D.P. Faria, A.T. Garcez,
C.A. Buchpigel, C.T. Braconi, E. Mendes, A.A. Sall, P.M.D.A. Zanotto, J.P.S. Peron,
A.R. Muotri, P.C.B.B. Beltrao-Braga, The Brazilian zika virus strain causes birth
defects in experimental models, Nature 534 (2016) 267–271, https://doi.org/
10.1038/nature18296.

[129] P.P. Garcez, E.C. Loiola, R.M. Da Costa, L.M. Higa, P. Trindade, R. Delvecchio,

J.M. Nascimento, R. Brindeiro, A. Tanuri, S.K. Rehen, Zika virus: zika virus impairs
growth in human neurospheres and brain organoids, Science (80-.) 352 (2016)
816–818, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf6116.

[130] T.J. Nowakowski, A.A. Pollen, E. Di Lullo, C. Sandoval-Espinosa, M. Bershteyn,

A.R. Kriegstein, Expression analysis highlights AXL as a candidate zika virus entry
receptor in neural stem cells, Cell Stem Cell 18 (2016) 591–596, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.stem.2016.03.012.

[131] M.F. Wells, M.R. Salick, O. Wiskow, D.J. Ho, K.A. Worringer, R.J. Ihry,

S. Kommineni, B. Bilican, J.R. Klim, E.J. Hill, L.T. Kane, C. Ye, A. Kaykas, K. Eggan,
Genetic ablation of AXL does not protect human neural progenitor cells and

cerebral organoids from zika virus infection, Cell Stem Cell 19 (2016) 703–708,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016.11.011.

[132] J. Dang, S.K. Tiwari, G. Lichinchi, Y. Qin, V.S. Patil, A.M. Eroshkin, T.M. Rana,

Zika virus depletes neural progenitors in human cerebral organoids through
activation of the innate immune receptor TLR3, Cell Stem Cell 19 (2016) 258–265,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016.04.014.

[133] R.A. Larocca, P. Abbink, J.P.S. Peron, P.M.D.A. Zanotto, M.J. Iampietro,
A. Badamchi-Zadeh, M. Boyd, D. Ng’ang’a, M. Kirilova, R. Nityanandam,
N.B. Mercado, Z. Li, E.T. Moseley, C.A. Bricault, E.N. Borducchi, P.B. Giglio,
D. Jetton, G. Neubauer, J.P. Nkolola, L.F. Maxﬁeld, R.A. De La Barrera,
R.G. Jarman, K.H. Eckels, N.L. Michael, S.J. Thomas, D.H. Barouch, Vaccine
protection against Zika virus from Brazil, Nature 536 (2016) 474–478, https://
doi.org/10.1038/nature18952.

[134] P. Abbink, R.A. Larocca, R.A. De La Barrera, C.A. Bricault, E.T. Moseley, M. Boyd,
M. Kirilova, Z. Li, D. Ng’ang’a, O. Nanayakkara, R. Nityanandam, N.B. Mercado,
E.N. Borducchi, A. Agarwal, A.L. Brinkman, C. Cabral, A. Chandrashekar,
P.B. Giglio, D. Jetton, J. Jimenez, B.C. Lee, S. Mojta, K. Molloy, M. Shetty,
G.H. Neubauer, K.E. Stephenson, J.P.S. Peron, P.M.A. De Zanotto, J. Misamore,
B. Finneyfrock, M.G. Lewis, G. Alter, K. Modjarrad, R.G. Jarman, K.H. Eckels,
N.L. Michael, S.J. Thomas, D.H. Barouch, Protective efﬁcacy of multiple vaccine
platforms against Zika virus challenge in rhesus monkeys, Science (80-) 353
(2016) 1129–1132, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aah6157.

[135] X. Qian, H.N. Nguyen, M.M. Song, C. Hadiono, S.C. Ogden, C. Hammack, B. Yao,
G.R. Hamersky, F. Jacob, C. Zhong, K.J. Yoon, W. Jeang, L. Lin, Y. Li, J. Thakor,
D.A. Berg, C. Zhang, E. Kang, M. Chickering, D. Nauen, C.Y. Ho, Z. Wen,
K.M. Christian, P.Y. Shi, B.J. Maher, H. Wu, P. Jin, H. Tang, H. Song, G.L. Ming,
Brain-region-speciﬁc organoids Using mini- bioreactors for modeling ZIKV
Exposure, Cell 165 (2016) 1238–1254, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cell.2016.04.032.

[136] R.S. dos Reis, S. Sant, H. Keeney, M.C.E. Wagner, V. Ayyavoo, Modeling HIV-1

neuropathogenesis using three-dimensional human brain organoids (hBORGs)
with HIV-1 infected microglia, Sci. Rep. 10 (2020), 15209, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-020-72214-0.

[137] L.D. Aiuto, D.C. Bloom, J.N. Naciri, A. Smith, T.G. Edwards, L. Mcclain, J.A. Callio,
M. Jessup, J. Wood, K. Chowdari, M. Demers, E.E. Abrahamson, M.D. Ikonomovic,
L. Viggiano, R. De Zio, S. Watkins, P.R. Kinchington, L. Nimgaonkar, Modeling
herpes simplex virus 1 infections in human central nervous system neuronal cells
using two- and three- dimensional cultures derived from induced pluripotent stem
cells, J. Virol. 93 (2019) e00111–e00119, https://doi.org/10.1128/JVI.00111-19.
[138] J.J. Danielson, N. Perez, J.D. Romano, I. Coppens, Modelling Toxoplasma gondii
infection in a 3D cell culture system in vitro: comparison with infection in 2D cell
monolayers, PLoS One 13 (2018), e0208558, https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0208558.

[139] H.H. Seo, H.W. Han, S.E. Lee, S.H. Hong, S.H. Cho, S.C. Kim, S.K. Koo, J.H. Kim,
Modelling Toxoplasma gondii infection in human cerebral organoids, Emerg.
Microb. Infect. 9 (2020) 1943–1954, https://doi.org/10.1080/
22221751.2020.1812435.

[140] M. Kessler, K. Hoffmann, K. Fritsche, V. Brinkmann, H.J. Mollenkopf, O. Thieck,
A.R. Teixeira da Costa, E.I. Braicu, J. Sehouli, M. Mangler, H. Berger, T.F. Meyer,
Chronic Chlamydia infection in human organoids increases stemness and promotes
age-dependent CpG methylation, Nat. Commun. 10 (2019) 1194, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41467-019-09144-7.

[141] J.L.V. Shaw, G.S. Wills, K.F. Lee, P.J. Horner, M.O. McClure, V.M. Abrahams,

N. Wheelhouse, H.N. Jabbour, H.O.D. Critchley, G. Entrican, A.W. Horne,
Chlamydia trachomatis infection increases fallopian tube PROKR2 via TLR2 and
NFκB activation resulting in a microenvironment predisposed to ectopic
pregnancy, Am. J. Pathol. 178 (2011) 253–260, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ajpath.2010.11.019.

[142] M. Sharma, T. Rudel, Apoptosis resistance in Chlamydia-infected cells: a fate worse
than death? FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 55 (2009) 154–161, https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2008.00515.x.

[143] C. Chumduri, R.K. Gurumurthy, P.K. Zadora, Y. Mi, T.F. Meyer, Chlamydia

infection promotes host DNA damage and proliferation but impairs the DNA
damage response, Cell Host Microbe 13 (2013) 746–758, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chom.2013.05.010.

[144] M. Hvid, A. Baczynska, B. Deleuran, J. Fedder, H.J. Knudsen, G. Christiansen,
S. Birkelund, Interleukin-1 is the initiator of Fallopian tube destruction during
Chlamydia trachomatis infection, Cell Microbiol. 9 (2007) 2795–2803, https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.00996.x.

[145] K. Rajeeve, N. Vollmuth, S. Janaki-Raman, T.F. Wulff, A. Baluapuri, F.R. Dejure,

C. Huber, J. Fink, M. Schmalhofer, W. Schmitz, R. Sivadasan, E. Wolf,
W. Eisenreich, A. Schulze, J. Seibel, T. Rudel, Reprogramming of host glutamine
metabolism during Chlamydia trachomatis infection and its key role in
peptidoglycan synthesis, Nat. Microbiol. 5 (2020) 1390–1402, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41564-020-0762-5.

[146] H. zur Hausen, Papillomaviruses in the causation of human cancers - a brief
historical account, Virology 384 (2009) 260–265, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.virol.2008.11.046.

[147] P. Koskela, T. Anttila, T. Bjørge, A. Brunsvig, J. Dillner, M. Hakama, T. Hakulinen,
E. Jellum, M. Lehtinen, P. Lenner, T. Luostarinen, E. Pukkala, P. Saikku,
S. Thoresen, L. Youngman, J. Paavonen, Chlamydia trachomatis infection as a risk
factor for invasive cervical cancer, Int. J. Cancer 85 (2000) 35–39, https://
doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0215(20000101)85:1<35::AID-IJC6>3.0.CO;2-A.

[148] S. Seraceni, G. Campisciano, C. Contini, M. Comar, HPV genotypes distribution in

Chlamydia trachomatis co-infection in a large cohort of women from north-east

16

M.B. Kim et al.

Materials Today Bio 16 (2022) 100345

Italy, J. Med. Microbiol. 65 (2016) 406–413, https://doi.org/10.1099/
jmm.0.000245.

[149] S. Koster, R.K. Gurumurthy, N. Kumar, P.G. Prakash, J. Dhanraj, S. Bayer,
H. Berger, S.M. Kurian, M. Drabkina, H.J. Mollenkopf, C. Goosmann,
V. Brinkmann, Z. Nagel, M. Mangler, T.F. Meyer, C. Chumduri, Modelling
Chlamydia and HPV co-infection in patient-derived ectocervix organoids reveals
distinct cellular reprogramming, Nat. Commun. 13 (2022) 1030, https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41467-022-28569-1.

[150] E. Driehuis, S. Kolders, S. Spelier, K. L~ohmussaar, S.M. Willems, L.A. Devriese,

R. de Bree, E.J. de Ruiter, J. Korving, H. Begthel, J.H. van Es, V. Geurts, G.W. He,
R.H. van Jaarsveld, R. Oka, M.J. Muraro, J. Vivi(cid:1)e, M.M.J.M. Zandvliet,
A.P.A. Hendrickx, N. Iakobachvili, P. Sridevi, O. Kranenburg, R. van Boxtel,
G.J.P.L. Kops, D.A. Tuveson, P.J. Peters, A. van Oudenaarden, H. Clevers, Oral
mucosal organoids as a potential platform for personalized cancer therapy, Cancer
Discov. 9 (2019) 852–871, https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-18-1522.

[151] D. Sawinski, S. Goral, BK virus infection: an update on diagnosis and treatment,

Nephrol. Dial. Transplant. 30 (2015) 209–217, https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/
gfu023.

[152] F. Schutgens, M.B. Rookmaaker, T. Margaritis, A. Rios, C. Ammerlaan, J. Jansen,
L. Gijzen, M. Vormann, A. Vonk, M. Viveen, F.Y. Yengej, S. Derakhshan, K.M. de
Winter-de Groot, B. Artegiani, R. van Boxtel, E. Cuppen, A.P.A. Hendrickx,
M.M. van den Heuvel-Eibrink, E. Heitzer, H. Lanz, J. Beekman, J.L. Murk,
R. Masereeuw, F. Holstege, J. Drost, M.C. Verhaar, H. Clevers, Tubuloids derived
from human adult kidney and urine for personalized disease modeling, Nat.
Biotechnol. 37 (2019) 303–313, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-019-0048-8.

[153] F. Braun, M. Lütgehetmann, S. Pfefferle, M.N. Wong, A. Carsten,

M.T. Lindenmeyer, D. N€orz, F. Heinrich, K. Meißner, D. Wichmann, S. Kluge,
O. Gross, K. Pueschel, A.S. Schr€oder, C. Edler, M. Aepfelbacher, V.G. Puelles,
T.B. Huber, SARS-CoV-2 renal tropism associates with acute kidney injury, Lancet
396 (2020) 597–598, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31759-1.

[158] F. Gerbe, E. Sidot, D.J. Smyth, M. Ohmoto, I. Matsumoto, V. Dardalhon, P. Cesses,

L. Garnier, M. Pouzolles, B. Brulin, M. Bruschi, Y. Harcus, V.S. Zimmermann,
N. Taylor, R.M. Maizels, P. Jay, Intestinal epithelial tuft cells initiate type 2
mucosal immunity to helminth parasites, Nature 529 (2016) 226–230, https://
doi.org/10.1038/nature16527.

[159] X.C. Luo, Z.H. Chen, J.B. Xue, D.X. Zhao, C. Lu, Y.H. Li, S.M. Li, Y.W. Du, Q. Liu,
P. Wang, M. Liu, L. Huang, Infection by the parasitic helminth Trichinella spiralis
activates a Tas2r-mediated signaling pathway in intestinal tuft cells, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116 (2019) 5564–5569, https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1812901116.

[160] S.P. Colgan, C.T. Taylor, Hypoxia: an alarm signal during intestinal inﬂammation,

Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 7 (2014) 281–287, https://doi.org/10.1038/
nrgastro.2010.39.

[161] E.S. Friedman, K. Bittinger, T.V. Esipova, L. Hou, L. Chau, J. Jiang, C. Mesaros,
P.J. Lund, X. Liang, G.A. FitzGerald, M. Goulian, D. Lee, B.A. Garcia, I.A. Blair,
S.A. Vinogradov, G.D. Wu, Microbes vs. chemistry in the origin of the anaerobic
gut lumen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115 (2018) 4170–4175, https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.1718635115.

[162] N.E. Zeitouni, S. Chotikatum, M. von K€ockritz-Blickwede, H.Y. Naim, The impact

of hypoxia on intestinal epithelial cell functions: consequences for invasion by
bacterial pathogens, Mol. Cell. Pediatr. 3 (2016) 14, https://doi.org/10.1186/
s40348-016-0041-y.

[163] D. Dutta, I. Heo, R. O’connor, Studying Cryptosporidium infection in 3D tissue-
derived human organoid culture systems by microinjection, JoVE 2019 (2019),
https://doi.org/10.3791/59610.

[164] I. Heo, D. Dutta, D.A. Schaefer, N. Iakobachvili, B. Artegiani, N. Sachs,

K.E. Boonekamp, G. Bowden, A.P.A. Hendrickx, R.J.L. Willems, P.J. Peters,
M.W. Riggs, R. O’Connor, H. Clevers, Modelling Cryptosporidium infection in
human small intestinal and lung organoids, Nat. Microbiol. 3 (2018) 814–823,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-018-0177-8.

[154] J. Jansen, K.C. Reimer, J.S. Nagai, F.S. Varghese, G.J. Overheul, M. de Beer,

[165] S. Flashner, K.S. Yan, H. Nakagawa, 3D organoids: an untapped platform for

R. Roverts, D. Daviran, L.A.S. Fermin, B. Willemsen, M. Beukenboom, S. Djudjaj,
S. von Stillfried, L.E. van Eijk, M. Mastik, M. Bulthuis, W. den Dunnen, H. van
Goor, J.L. Hillebrands, S.H. Triana, T. Alexandrov, M.C. Timm, B.T. van den Berge,
M. van den Broek, Q. Nlandu, J. Heijnert, E.M.J. Bindels, R.M. Hoogenboezem,
F. Mooren, C. Kuppe, P. Miesen, K. Grünberg, T. Ijzermans, E.J. Steenbergen,
J. Czogalla, M.F. Schreuder, N. Sommerdijk, A. Akiva, P. Boor, V.G. Puelles,
J. Floege, T.B. Huber, H. Achdout, A. Aimon, E. Bar-David, H. Barr, A. Ben-Shmuel,
J. Bennett, M.L. Boby, B. Borden, G.R. Bowman, J. Brun, S. BVNBS, M. Calmiano,
A. Carbery, E. Cattermole, E. Chernychenko, J.D. Choder, A. Clyde, J.E. Cofﬂand,
G. Cohen, J. Cole, A. Contini, L. Cox, M. Cvitkovic, A. Dias, K. Donckers,
D.L. Dotson, A. Douangamath, S. Duberstein, T. Dudgeon, L. Dunnett,
P.K. Eastman, N. Erez, C.J. Eyermann, M. Fairhead, G. Fate, D. Fearon, O. Federov,
M. Ferla, R.S. Fernandes, L. Ferrins, R. Foster, H. Foster, R. Gabizon, A. Garcia-
Sastre, V.O. Gawriljuk, P. Gehrtz, C. Gileadi, C. Giroud, W.G. Glass, R. Glen,
Itai glinert, A.S. Godoy, M. Gorichko, T. Gorrie-Stone, E.J. Griffen, S.H. Hart,
J. Heer, M. Henry, M. Hill, S. Horrell, M.F.D. Hurley, T. Israely, A. Jajack, E. Jnoff,
D. Jochmans, T. John, S. De Jonghe, A.L. Kantsadi, P.W. Kenny, J.L. Kiappes,
L. Koekemoer, B. Kovar, T. Krojer, A.A. Lee, B.A. Lefker, H. Levy, N. London,
P. Lukacik, H.B. Macdonald, B. Maclean, T.R. Malla, T. Matviiuk,
W. McCorkindale, B.L. McGovern, S. Melamed, O. Michurin, H. Mikolajek,
B.F. Milne, A. Morris, G.M. Morris, M.J. Morwitzer, D. Moustakas, A.M. Nakamura,
J.B. Neto, J. Neyts, L. Nguyen, G.D. Noske, V. Oleinikovas, G. Oliva, D. Owen,
V. Psenak, R. Pai, J. Pan, N. Paran, B. Perry, M. Pingle, J. Pinjari, B. Politi,
A. Powell, R. Puni, V.L. Rangel, R.N. Reddi, S.P. Reid, E. Resnick, E.G. Ripka,
M.C. Robinson, R.P. Robinson, J. Rodriguez-Guerra, R. Rosales, D. Rufa,
C. Schoﬁeld, M. Shafeev, A. Shaikh, J. Shi, K. Shurrush, S. Sing, A. Sittner,
R. Skyner, A. Smalley, M.D. Smilova, L.J. Solmesky, J. Spencer, C. Strain-Damarell,
V. Swamy, H. Tamir, R. Tennant, W. Thompson, A. Thompson, S. Tomasia,
A. Tumber, I. Vakonakis, R.P. van Rij, L. van Geel, M. Vaschetto, E.B. Vitner,
V. Voelz, A. Volkamer, F. von Delft, A. von Delft, M. Walsh, W. Ward,
C. Weatherall, S. Weiss, K.M. White, C.F. Wild, M. Wittmann, N. Wright,
Y. Yahalom-Ronen, D. Zaidmann, H. Zidane, N. Zitzmann, I.G. Costa,
R.K. Schneider, B. Smeets, R. Kramann, SARS-CoV-2 infects the human kidney and
drives ﬁbrosis in kidney organoids, Cell Stem Cell 29 (2022) 217–231, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2021.12.010, e8.

[155] V. Monteil, H. Kwon, P. Prado, A. Hagelkrüys, R.A. Wimmer, M. Stahl, A. Leopoldi,
E. Garreta, C. Hurtado del Pozo, F. Prosper, J.P. Romero, G. Wirnsberger,
H. Zhang, A.S. Slutsky, R. Conder, N. Montserrat, A. Mirazimi, J.M. Penninger,
Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 infections in engineered human tissues using clinical-
grade soluble human ACE2, Cell 181 (2020) 905–913, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cell.2020.04.004, e7.

[156] D. Dutta, H. Clevers, Organoid culture systems to study host–pathogen

interactions, Curr. Opin. Immunol. 48 (2017) 15–22, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.coi.2017.07.012.

[157] C. Aguilar, M. Alves da Silva, M. Saraiva, M. Neyazi, I.A.S. Olsson, S. Bartfeld,

Organoids as host models for infection biology – a review of methods, Exp. Mol.
Med. 53 (2021) 1471–1482, https://doi.org/10.1038/s12276-021-00629-4.

studying host–microbiome interactions in esophageal cancers, Microorganisms 9
(2021) 2182, https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms9112182.

[166] H.K. Kim, H. Kim, M.K. Lee, W.H. Choi, Y. Jang, J.S. Shin, J.Y. Park, D.H. Bae,
S.I. Hyun, K.H. Kim, H.W. Han, B. Lim, G. Choi, M. Kim, Y. Chang Lim, J. Yoo,
Generation of human tonsil epithelial organoids as an ex vivo model for SARS-CoV-
2 infection, Biomaterials 283 (2022), 121460, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2022.121460.

[167] B. Makovoz, R. Moeller, A. Zebitz Eriksen, B.R. TenOever, T.A. Blenkinsop, SARS-
CoV-2 infection of ocular cells from human adult donor eyes and hESC-derived eye
organoids, SSRN Electron. J. (2020), 3650574, https://doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.3650574.

[168] M. Hofer, M.P. Lutolf, Engineering organoids, Nat. Rev. Mater. 6 (2021) 402–420,

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41578-021-00279-y.

[169] B.R. Dye, D.R. Hill, M.A. Ferguson, Y.H. Tsai, M.S. Nagy, R. Dyal, J.M. Wells,

C.N. Mayhew, R. Nattiv, O.D. Klein, E.S. White, G.H. Deutsch, J.R. Spence, In vitro
generation of human pluripotent stem cell derived lung organoids, Elife 2015
(2015) 1–25, https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05098.

[170] J. Kim, B.K. Koo, J.A. Knoblich, Human organoids: model systems for human
biology and medicine, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 21 (2020) 571–584, https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41580-020-0259-3.

[171] E.A. Aisenbrey, W.L. Murphy, Synthetic alternatives to Matrigel, Nat. Rev. Mater.

5 (2020) 539–551, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41578-020-0199-8.

[172] R. Cruz-Acu~na, M. Quir(cid:1)os, A.E. Farkas, P.H. Dedhia, S. Huang, D. Siuda, V. García-
Hern(cid:1)andez, A.J. Miller, J.R. Spence, A. Nusrat, A.J. García, Synthetic hydrogels for
human intestinal organoid generation and colonic wound repair, Nat. Cell Biol. 19
(2017) 1326–1335, https://doi.org/10.1038/ncb3632.

[173] A.E.G. Baker, L.C. Bahlmann, C. Xue, Y.H. Lu (John), A.A. Chin, J. Cruickshank,

D.W. Cescon, M.S. Shoichet, Chemically and mechanically deﬁned hyaluronan
hydrogels emulate the extracellular matrix for unbiased in vivo and in vitro
organoid formation and drug testing in cancer, Mater, Today Off. 56 (2022)
96–113, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2022.01.023.

[174] R. Curvello, D. Alves, H.E. Abud, G. Garnier, A thermo-responsive collagen-

nanocellulose hydrogel for the growth of intestinal organoids, Mater. Sci. Eng. C
124 (2021), 112051, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2021.112051.

[175] L. Shariati, Y. Esmaeili, S. Haghjooy Javanmard, E. Bidram, A. Amini, Organoid
technology: current standing and future perspectives, Stem Cell. 39 (2021)
1625–1649, https://doi.org/10.1002/stem.3379.

[176] S.E. Park, A. Georgescu, D. Huh, Organoids-on-a-chip, Science 965 (2019)

960–965, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw7894.

[177] E. Kim, S. Choi, B. Kang, J.H. Kong, Y. Kim, W.H. Yoon, H.R. Lee, S.E. Kim,

H.M. Kim, H.S. Lee, C. Yang, Y.J. Lee, M. Kang, T.Y. Roh, S. Jung, S. Kim, J.H. Ku,
K. Shin, Creation of bladder assembloids mimicking tissue regeneration and
cancer, Nature 588 (2020) 664–669, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-3034-
x.

17

