ll

Review
Organoids and organs-on-chips: Insights
into human gut-microbe interactions

Jens Puschhof,1,2,4 Cayetano Pleguezuelos-Manzano,1,2,4 and Hans Clevers1,2,3,*
1Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW) and UMC Utrecht, 3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands
2Oncode Institute, Hubrecht Institute, 3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands
3The Princess Ma´ xima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands
4These authors contributed equally
*Correspondence: h.clevers@hubrecht.eu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2021.04.002

SUMMARY

The important and diverse roles of the gut microbiota in human health and disease are increasingly recognized.
The difﬁculty of inferring causation from metagenomic microbiome sequencing studies and from mouse-hu-
man interspecies differences has prompted the development of sophisticated in vitro models of human gut-
microbe interactions. Here, we review recent advances in the co-culture of microbes with intestinal and colonic
epithelia, comparing the rapidly developing ﬁelds of organoids and organs-on-chips with other standard
models. We describe how speciﬁc individual processes by which microbes and epithelia interact can be reca-
pitulated in vitro. Using examples of bacterial, viral, and parasitic infections, we highlight the advantages of
each culture model and discuss current trends and future possibilities to build more complex co-cultures.

INTRODUCTION

The human intestinal tract is inhabited by a multitude of microor-
ganisms, collectively referred to as the gut microbiota. This
diverse community of bacteria, fungi, protozoans, viruses, and
bacteriophages is essential to maintaining healthy gut physi-
ology. Infection with pathogenic species like Clostridium difﬁcile
or norovirus, as well as gut microbiota disbalances have been
linked to a variety of disease conditions, ranging from infectious
diseases to complex chronic diseases like inﬂammatory bowel
disease, metabolic syndrome, and colorectal cancer.

The advent of sophisticated sequencing technologies has
enabled detailed metagenomic studies on the gut microbiome
(referring to the genetic information of the gut microbiota) in
health and disease. The resulting datasets reveal numerous as-
sociations between individual microbial species or communities
and speciﬁc diseases. However, moving from association to
causation through mechanistic insights represents a major chal-
lenge due to the complexity of these relationships and the limita-
tions of ‘‘holistic’’ model systems for human gut-microbe inter-
actions. Mouse models remain the gold standard for modeling
and studying mammalian host-microbe interactions at high
complexity. Nevertheless, these models have substantial draw-
backs with regard to experimental control, scalability, and reca-
pitulation of human intestinal interactions with its host-speciﬁc
commensals and pathogens (Ettayebi et al., 2016; Lamers
et al., 2020; Walter et al., 2020). These factors have called into
question how human-microbe interactions can be transferred
to mouse models (Walter et al., 2020). In recent years, a number
of more reductionist in vitro approaches have been developed
that represent an opportunity for closing the gap between micro-
bial association with disease and mechanistic insight. Human
tissue-derived organoids (Kim et al., 2020) and organs-on-chips

(Bein et al., 2018) allow clonal expansion (Blokzijl et al., 2016),
genetic engineering (Fujii et al., 2015), and modeling of human-
speciﬁc processes (Yin et al., 2015).

In this review, we introduce intestinal organoids and organ-on-
a-chip platforms and describe how they have been used in the
study of host-microbiota interactions (Figure 1). We systemati-
cally discuss which aspects of the microbiota and the human in-
testinal epithelium can be modeled using these new platforms.
We compare the two approaches with each other and to related
models such as colorectal cancer cell
lines and organotypic
explant cultures, for which we only discuss individual studies
to showcase key differences. An evaluation of each model’s suit-
ability for recapitulating the individual interaction processes is
provided in Table 1. In the ﬁnal section, we highlight which fea-
tures of this complex interplay remain difﬁcult to assess in vitro
and how future developments may yield more sophisticated
co-culture systems.

THE MODEL SYSTEMS

research. Their

Cancer cell lines
Since their advent in the 1950s, cell lines derived from tumors
and grown as monolayers have become a central workhorse of
biomedical
robust growth, often indeﬁnite
expansion capacity, ease of use, and favorable cost proﬁle
have facilitated their wide use to this day. A panoply of colo-
rectal-cancer-derived cell
lines allow the recapitulation of
diverse features of this disease (Wilding and Bodmer, 2014).
Caco-2 is the most frequently used cell line for modeling healthy
intestinal interactions, as it shares some features with small in-
testinal enterocytes despite being derived from a colon carci-
noma (Sambuy et al., 2005).

Cell Host & Microbe 29, June 9, 2021 ª 2021 Elsevier Inc. 867

ll

Review

Co-culture
duration

s
e
r
u
t
a
e
F

ASC intestinal
organoids

iPSC intestinal
orgnaoids

Intestinal cell
lines

Explants

Cell representation

3D
Microinjection

 Organoid shearing

2D co-culture

Organ-on-a-chip co-culture

Explant co-culture

e
c
r
u
o
s

l

a

i
l

e
h
t
i
p
E

y
g
e
t
a
r
t
s

e
r
u
t
l
u
c
-
o
C

Figure 1. Gut epithelium co-culture models
Top left: overview of sources for intestinal epithelial cells. Organoids can be derived from both ASCs and PSCs. Cancer-derived cell lines and organotypic
explants represent alternative sources of epithelial cells. Top right: main features of in vitro co-culture models. Representation of cell types, generation of an
oxygen gradient from epithelium to lumen, and co-culture duration are depicted. Bottom: co-culture strategies for the different models. Microbes can be mi-
croinjected into organoids, added during organoid shearing, or added to monolayers grown from cell lines, organoids, or explants. Intestines-on-chip provide an
apical chamber for microbe exposure.

Yet, cell

lines possess substantial drawbacks. Their trans-
formed character and genomic instability, growth in an unphy-
siological architecture, and failure to recapitulate the cellular het-
erogeneity of the original organ limit the research questions they
can address when co-cultured with microbes. Nevertheless, co-
cultures of colorectal cancer cell lines with microbes in mono-
layer cultures (or more recently in intestine-on-chip formats)
recapitulate some aspects of their interactions.

Adult stem cell-derived organoids
Organoids of the human small intestine and colon have recently
emerged as tools to study human gut physiology in vitro (Sato
et al., 2011). Starting from adult stem cells (ASCs), which are
located at the bottom of the intestinal crypts, healthy and
cancerous intestinal epithelium can be grown in a gelatinous
mixture of basement membrane extract (BME, also known as
Matrigel(cid:2)). These reductionist models allow unlimited propaga-
tion of all intestinal epithelial cell types in a self-assembling 3D
architecture resembling their in vivo organization and composi-
tional characteristics of the gut region from which they are
derived (Beumer et al., 2020; Kayisoglu et al., 2021).

Human intestinal organoids consist of a polarized monolayer
epithelium with a ﬂuid-ﬁlled central space representing the orig-
inal organ’s lumen. Because of this, 3D intestinal organoids
require microinjection of bacteria into their lumen for an accurate
representation of their in vivo spatial relationship (Bartfeld, 2016;
Heo et al., 2018). As an alternative to microinjections, organoids
can be replated as 2D monolayers on transwell plates as is used
for stomach (Boccellato et al., 2019) and colon (Sasaki et al.,

868 Cell Host & Microbe 29, June 9, 2021

2020) organoids to enable co-cultures including a more mature
mucus layer. Different exposure routes have also been used
for viral co-cultures, including 2D layers (Ettayebi et al., 2016)
and sheared 3D organoids (Fakhiri et al., 2019).

Pluripotent stem cell-derived organoids
Similar to ASCs, pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) can give rise to or-
ganoids. Starting from either embryonic stem cells (ESCs) or
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), the differentiation toward
a speciﬁc organ type is recapitulated over a time frame of weeks
to months by sequential exposure to external growth factors
guiding tissue-speciﬁc developmental routes (Spence et al.,
2011). The resulting product is, in contrast to ASC-derived orga-
noids, not limited to intestinal epithelial cell types but can also
contain mesenchymal cells. Once the intended organ speciﬁca-
tion is achieved, the organoids can be further expanded under
the conditions deﬁned for ASC-derived intestinal organoids. As
for ASC-based organoids, the main co-culture method to date
has been microinjection of microbes into the lumen of iPSC-
based organoids (Forbester et al., 2015; Holokai et al., 2019).

Organs-on-a-chip systems
The term ‘‘organ-on-a-chip’’ describes a microﬂuidic device con-
taining the cell types of interest in close recapitulation of the original
tissue structure, function, and physiology (Bein et al., 2018). In
comparison with organoids, intestine-on-a-chip platforms offer
greater experimental control through multiple connected micro-
ﬂuidic channels. Most intestine-chips today rely on hollow chan-
nels with a smooth surface, while recent approaches enable the

 
 
Review

ll

Table 1. Comparison of in vitro gut-microbe co-culture models

Model comparison

ASC
organoids

ASC
chips

PSC
organoids

2D organoids

Cell line
chips

2D cell
lines

Explants

Features

Oxygen gradient (endogenous)

Oxygen gradient (engineered)

Co-culture duration

Flow & Peristalsis

Cell type representation

Regional identity

Processes

Mutagenesis

Epithelial turnover

Intestinal cell fate

Epigenetics

Epithelial damage & Barrier integrity

Pattern recognition & Inﬂammation

Adhesion & Invasion

Pathogen replication & Life cycle

Perspectives

Inclusion of microenvironment

Complex architecture

Microbial community dynamics

Drug screens

++

-

++

-

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

++

+++

++

+++

++

++

+

++

-

+++

+++

+++

++

++

++*

++

++

+++*

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

++

++

-

+

-

++

+

+

++

++

++

++

+++

+++

+++

+++

++

+

++

-

++

++

+

++*

+++*

+

++

+

+++*

+++

+++

+++

+++

++

-

+

+

-

+++

+++

+++

-

-

+

+

-

+

+++

+

+

+

+++

+

++

+

-

++*

-

+

-

-

+

+

-

+

+

+

+

+

++

-

+

+

-

-

-

-

+++

+++

-

-

-

-

+

+++

+++

+

+++

+++

+

+

Adult stem-cell (ASC)-, pluripotent stem-cell (PSC)-derived organoid, and chip models are compared with monolayer cultures and organotypic ex-
plants. *platform potential, which remains to be demonstrated.

generation of crypt-villus-like structures through the induction of
ﬂow (Kim et al, 2016) or using a scaffold surface (Nikolaev et al.,
2020). The cell types used to populate chip devices are diverse,
ranging from immortalized cell lines (Beaurivage et al., 2019; Kim
et al., 2012) to primary tissue (Hinman et al., 2019; Jalili-Firoozinez-
had et al., 2019), PSC-derived intestinal organoid cells (Naumov-
ska et al., 2020; Workman et al., 2018), or adult stem-cell-derived
organoids (Nikolaev et al., 2020). Intestines-on-a-chip can be
ﬂushed with liquids to alter luminal versus basal conditions or to
create gradients of growth factors or oxygen (Kim et al., 2019;
Shah et al., 2016) allowing recapitulation of the spatial cell-type
compartmentalization that is typical of the crypt architecture (Hin-
man et al., 2019). This mediates ﬁne-tuning of the culture environ-
ment for bacteria in the intestinal lumen and allows repeated expo-
sure to, and harvesting of, microbes (Grassart et al., 2019; Jalili-
Firoozinezhad et al., 2019; Shah et al., 2016). Furthermore, features
such as luminal ﬂow and even peristalsis can be incorporated as
another advantage of intestines-on-a-chip over static organoids
(Kim et al., 2012).

including stromal cells and a mucus layer (Gustafsson et al.,
2012). Explants are cultured in medium that does not support the
expansion of intestinal stem cells and suffer from decay of the
structures within days of culturing. Consequently, they are not
suited for longer-term studies or for applications where genetic en-
gineering of tissue components is required. Colonic explant cul-
tures have proven useful for the study of viral diseases such as
HIV, where the presence of CD4+ T cells has enabled infection
modeling (Fletcher et al., 2006). As explant models normally retain
part of their microbiota, the addition of further bacterial species for
deﬁned co-cultures is not routinely performed. However, a proto-
col for eradicating the endogenous microbiota and repopulating
human colonic explants with a donor microbial suspension has
recently been described (Sarrabayrouse et al., 2020).

MODEL FEATURES

These in vitro models differ in how accurately they can recapitu-
late crucial features for representative co-culture. Below, we
compare their suitability to assess distinct host features.

Organotypic explant cultures
Whereas the previously mentioned culture systems are based on
recreating the intestinal tissue architecture in vitro, organotypic
explant cultures rely on transferring intact pieces of the intestinal
mucosa to an ex vivo culture system. These systems, ﬁrst
described in the 1960s, recapitulate the mucosal architecture,

Oxygen gradient
The intestinal vascular network ensures ample oxygen supply for
the epithelial cells, but the levels of oxygen steeply drop over
one-cell-diameter toward the intestinal lumen, reaching a PO2
below 10 mmHg (Zheng et al., 2015). Most gut microbes inhabit

Cell Host & Microbe 29, June 9, 2021 869

ll

the central gut lumen and are excluded from the mucus layer that
covers the villus epithelium, in line with their requirement of low
oxygen conditions. A major hurdle for in vitro systems is the reca-
pitulation of this oxygen gradient, providing sufﬁcient oxygen for
epithelial cells to survive while also creating a compartment with
low oxygen as required for most intestinal bacterial species.

Classical 2D cultures exhibit homogeneous oxygen levels, al-
lowing merely short-term co-cultures with most gut dwelling bac-
teria (Rubinstein et al., 2013). Recently, two groups developed
co-culture systems with an integrated oxygen gradient as a solu-
tion to this challenge (Kim et al., 2019; Sasaki et al., 2020): Human
colon organoids can be grown as a monolayer on a transwell
insert, which is subsequently ﬂushed with an anoxic gas mix
and sealed with a rubber plug. These approaches provide sufﬁ-
cient oxygen supply for epithelial cells from the basolateral me-
dium reservoir while allowing the culture of anaerobic species
in the hypoxic apical chamber (Sasaki et al., 2020). 3D organoids
can exhibit an oxygen gradient (DiMarco et al., 2014) and in our
experience, most anaerobic bacterial species can survive in the
hypoxic lumen of human intestinal organoids for up to a week.
The precise levels of oxygen within organoids are not known.
Novel approaches such as phosphorescent oxygen sensors
may facilitate more detailed studies on the microbial niche within
organoids in the future (Okkelman et al., 2020). Intestines-on-a-
chip represent the most controlled and scalable solution for
creating this oxygen gradient in vitro (Jalili-Firoozinezhad et al.,
2019; Marzorati et al., 2014). In a recently developed model, per-
fusable channels coupled to oxygen sensors offer opportunities
to ﬁne-tune oxygen levels at the basolateral and apical side of
layer and enable extended co-cultures under
the epithelial
controlled conditions (Jalili-Firoozinezhad et al., 2019).

Duration of co-culture
The gut microbiota colonizes the intestinal tract from birth and
forms a stable mutualistic relationship in the healthy state.
Several chronic disease states are linked with a lasting change
in microbial composition. Most epithelial co-cultures are per-
formed on a timescale of hours to days and do not model such
chronic states well.

Bacterial invasion studies in 2D cell lines are typically performed
over a time frame of hours (Rubinstein et al., 2013). The closed
lumen of 3D organoids enables the stable co-culture of most intes-
tinal microbes without bacterial death or overgrowth, but the
intrinsic need for organoids to be passaged every 7–14 days pro-
hibits any stable co-culture beyond this time frame. Nevertheless,
we have recently demonstrated the feasibility of repeatedly inject-
ing organoids with a single bacterial species over a time frame of
5 months with mutation accumulation in the epithelial cells as a
long-term readout (Pleguezuelos-Manzano et al., 2020). As an
alternative, 2D gastric cultures have been shown to allow co-cul-
ture of Helicobacter pylori for weeks (Boccellato et al., 2019), an
approach that should also work for small intestinal and colon orga-
noids. Intestine-on-a-chip systems have enabled co-cultures of
complex bacterial communities (Jalili-Firoozinezhad et al., 2019)
and individual species (Kim et al., 2016) for time frames of days
to weeks, respectively. The newest generation of intestines-on-
a-chip may enable month-long co-cultures on hollow tubes faith-
fully recapitulating the intestinal cell-type composition (Nikolaev
et al., 2020), but the potential of this technology to allow insights

870 Cell Host & Microbe 29, June 9, 2021

Review

into complex long-term relationships between microbes and
host cells remains to be demonstrated. For the aerobic eukaryotic
parasite Cryptosporidium parvum, cultures as long as four weeks
could be achieved both in adult stem cell-derived organoids
(Heo et al., 2018), monolayers, cultures (Wilke et al., 2019) and in-
testines-on-a-chip (Nikolaev et al., 2020).

Cellular representation
In vitro models based on primary tissue uniquely allow represen-
tation of diverse human cell types. Recent years have seen sub-
stantial improvements in differentiation strategies, especially for
organoids, by the incorporation of new media components and
transcription factors (Beumer et al.,
the overexpression of
2020). Adult stem-cell-based organoids offer opportunities to
grow tissue of a deﬁned region of the intestinal tract with its spe-
ciﬁc cellular subtypes (Beumer et al., 2020; Ranganathan et al.,
2019). Similarly, intestine-on-a-chip approaches allow the simul-
taneous acquisition of populations of proliferating and differenti-
ated cells along engineered crypts (Hinman et al., 2019; Kim et al.,
2019). Additionally, a recent study showed promising cell hetero-
geneity in a murine intestine-on-a-chip setup and the possibility
of using human primary cells on the same platform (Nikolaev
et al., 2020). Among the most thoroughly characterized intes-
tines-on-a-chip is an iPSC-based model, which allows genera-
tion of stem cells, paneth cells, transit-amplifying cells, entero-
cytes, goblet cells, and enteroendocrine cells (Workman et al.,
2018). Nevertheless, the vast majority of cells on this chip is in a
proliferative state and is difﬁcult to control for subspeciﬁcation
along the crypt-villus axis and regional identity, highlighting the
need for further developments that are currently being pursued
for iPSC-derived organoids (Mu´ nera et al., 2017). These efforts
to achieve proper cell-type representation are crucial for the
modeling of several interaction processes discussed below.

EPITHELIAL CONSEQUENCES OF MICROBIAL
INTERACTIONS

Microbes interact with the intestinal epithelium in a plethora of ways.
Co-cultures model several of these processes, allowing the study of
interdependence of multiple host-microbe interactions. Neverthe-
less, even recapitulating a single feature of microbe-epithelium
interaction can make for a useful model system. In this section,
we review the numerous ways by which commensal species and
pathogens can interact with the human gut epithelium (Figure 2)
and discuss to what extent the aforementioned models allow reca-
pitulation of these processes in vitro (Table 1).

DNA damage, mutagenesis, and cancer
The ability of pathogenic bacteria to induce epithelial transfor-
mation has been subject to much investigation since the ﬁrst
studies on Helicobacter pylori’s role in gastric tumorigenesis.
For colorectal cancer, several
large microbiome sequencing
studies have revealed associations with species such as Fuso-
bacterium nucleatum, enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis, and
genotoxic Escherichia coli (E. coli). Despite these numerous as-
sociations, few—if any—causal relationships between bacterial
species and colorectal cancer have been demonstrated in vitro.
One process for which organoids provide an ideally suited
long-term

is mutagenesis, as they allow the clonal,

model

Review

Mutagenesis

Cell proliferation

Barrier integrity disruption

ll

Figure 2. Microbe-epithelium interaction
processes
Top: epithelial processes in response to microbial
exposure. Top panel: epithelial mutation accumu-
lation, proliferation effects, and barrier
integrity
disruption. Middle panel: sensing of bacterial com-
ponents by TLRs and subsequent cytokine release
and immune cell recruitment; epigenetic and gene
fate
expression modulation by microbes; cell
changes induced by microbes. Bottom: microbial
interactions with the epithelium. Bacterial adhesion
to and invasion into epithelial cells; completion of
complex life cycles of pathogens (such as of eu-
karyotic parasites) in target cells; viral entry, repli-
cation, and release in epithelial cells.

s
e
s
s
e
c
o
r
p

l

a

i
l

e
h

t
i

p
E

s
e
s
s
e
c
o
r
p

a

t

i

o
b
o
r
c
M

i

TLR

Immune activation 
and inflammation

Epigenetics
and gene regulation

Bacterial adhesion 
and invasion

Eukaryotic parasite 
life cycle

expansion of genetically stable epithelium. Recently, a long-term
co-culture of genotoxic E. coli with human intestinal organoids
was employed to identify mutational signatures caused by the
bacterial genotoxin, colibactin (Pleguezuelos-Manzano et al.,
2020). In this study, a month-long co-culture protocol allowed
the detection of mutations caused by the DNA-damaging activity
lines and mouse
of colibactin. Of note, in studies using cell
models, colibactin had been described to cause double-strand
DNA breaks (Bossuet-Greif et al., 2018; Dejea et al., 2018; Dziu-
ba(cid:1)nska-Kusibab et al., 2020; Nougayre` de, 2006). The mutational
patterns discovered in the organoids were enriched in samples
from CRC origin, indicating the role of genotoxic E. coli in colonic
mutagenesis (Pleguezuelos-Manzano et al., 2020). More recently,
the exposure of mouse small intestinal organoids to genotoxic
E. coli was linked to epithelial transformation (Iftekhar et al., 2021).
Many studies focus on ways by which bacteria can contribute
to colorectal cancer initiation and progression beyond the induc-
tion of mutations. Several non-intestinal organoid systems have
been used to pinpoint bacterially driven activation of cancer-
associated pathways, aberrant proliferation, and replication
stress (Bauer et al., 2020; McCracken et al., 2014; Scanu et al.,
2015). We anticipate that applying these methods to colorectal
cancer organoids will reveal further causal relationships.

Viral entry and 
replication

Cell fate

features most easily assessed in vitro. A
seminal study (Kaiko et al., 2016) demon-
strated that butyrate, a short-chain fatty
acid (SCFA) and key metabolite of many
gut bacteria,
inhibits proliferation of
colonic stem cells. Intriguingly, differenti-
ated colonocytes can metabolize butyrate
thereby
without
this inhibiting effect,
providing a protected environment
for
stem cells in the colonic crypts. This study
highlights the potential of organoids to
disentangle responses of
individual cell
types to microbial stimuli. Two other
studies used murine colon organoids to
study the role of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
on proliferation on the intestinal epithelium.
Using qPCR (Neal et al., 2012) and ﬂow cytometric (Naito et al.,
2017) analysis of the proliferation markers, PCNA and Ki67,
respectively, a Toll-like receptor (TLR)-4-mediated inhibition of
proliferation was identiﬁed. The co-culture of iPSC-derived in-
testinal organoids with non-pathogenic strains of E. coli aided
the investigation of epithelial proliferation dynamics upon bacte-
ria challenge (Hill et al., 2017). Following exposure to bacteria,
organoids showed an initial wave of increased proliferation at
24 h post exposure followed by a decrease compared with un-
treated controls. We expect that the recent development of in-
testines-on-a-chip models with representative crypt-villus archi-
tecture and cell-type distribution (Jalili-Firoozinezhad et al.,
2019; Nikolaev et al., 2020) will enable further representative
studies on this topic in the future. For now, the experimental trac-
tability of organoids offers a versatile platform to study the ef-
fects of microbes and their metabolites on intestinal cell prolif-
eration.

Cell function and fate
The gut microbiota changes the function and differentiation of
host cells in various ways to cater to the microbes’ needs.
Many of these changes can be detected as altered host-cell
gene expression. Organoids and organs-on-chips are well suited
to disentangle these interactions, as transcriptomic data can be
attributed to either microbe or epithelial cells.

Epithelial cell turnover
Intestinal cell turnover can have important implications in wound
healing and colorectal cancer development. It is also one of the

As one example, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron was shown to
directly induce fut2 expression and mucus fucosylation by epithe-
lial cells in organoids and mice, offering an energy source for the

Cell Host & Microbe 29, June 9, 2021 871

ll

bacterium (Engevik et al., 2013). Non-pathogenic E. coli co-
cultured with iPSC-derived intestinal organoids induce a hypoxic
response as a consequence of local oxygen depletion by the bac-
teria, showcasing another mechanism by which bacteria can
change host-cell behavior (Hill et al., 2017). The ability of organo-
ids to differentiate into all intestinal epithelial cell types makes
them a well-suited model system to study microbial control over
epithelial regeneration, nutrient uptake, and hormone secretion.
Thus, increased goblet cell differentiation has been observed in
response to LPS derived from various bacterial species enriched
in colonic crypts (Naito et al., 2017). A challenge to this approach
is the difﬁculty of telling apart changes in differentiated cell num-
ber and expression levels in individual cells. Fluorescent reporters
for cell-type marker genes could overcome this hurdle. Using this
approach, Salmonella has been shown to reduce the number of
Lgr5+ stem cells in adult stem-cell-derived mouse intestinal orga-
noids (Zhang et al., 2014). We anticipate that recent work on
knockin reporters for intestinal cell types in human organoids
(Beumer et al., 2020) will contribute to larger-scale assessment
of cell (sub)type speciﬁcation by microbes in the future. Another
way to assess cell fate and function changes involves single cell
RNA sequencing, which allows the detailed characterization of or-
ganoid compositions (Gr€un et al., 2015). While this technique may
enable studies at greater detail than the aforementioned ap-
proaches, to the best of our knowledge, it has not been combined
with microbial in vitro co-cultures.

Gut microbes may directly modify the epigenetic proﬁle of host
cells (Qin and Wade, 2018). The tight experimental control pro-
vided by organoids can enable studies of such epigenetic effects
of microbe or metabolite exposure. In a pioneering study (Luko-
vac et al., 2014), the effects of Akkermansia muciniphila, Faeca-
libacterium prausnitzii, and their short-chain fatty acid products
were shown to affect, among others, histone deacetylases and
the consequent epigenetic marks in murine ileal organoids.
The observed induction of a marked transcriptional lipid meta-
bolism response by Akkermansia muciniphila adds to a growing
body of evidence of microbial
impact in metabolic diseases.
Despite this early promise, modeling the epigenetic effects of mi-
crobes in vitro is still in its infancy.

Epithelial damage and barrier integrity
The intestinal epithelial and mucus layers constitute the key bar-
rier separating food components and microbiota in the intestinal
lumen from the bloodstream. Several diseases such as inﬂam-
matory bowel disease (IBD) have been implicated with
decreased barrier function of the intestine, while a microbial
contribution to intestinal barrier integrity has been suggested
by numerous studies (Martini et al., 2017).

The structure of tight junctions between epithelial cells and bac-
terial effects on these junctions can readily be visualized in orga-
noids. This has been shown, among others, for pathogenic Sal-
monella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) by
staining for the tight junction protein, ZO-1, in mouse small intes-
tinal organoids (Zhang et al., 2014). In another study, the same
type of organoids was used to show a protective effect of the pro-
biotic Lactobacillus acidophilus against S. Typhimurium-induced
tissue damage (Lu et al., 2020). Using a different co-culture setup,
enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) strains were shown to disrupt
the mucus layer, microvilli structure, and tight junctions when

872 Cell Host & Microbe 29, June 9, 2021

Review

co-cultured with differentiated human colonocytes on a 2D mono-
layer setup (In et al., 2016). One straightforward way to assess
barrier integrity in vitro is by tracking ﬂuorescently labeled mole-
cules of high molecular weight from the apical to the basolateral
side of organoids (Leslie et al., 2015) or organs-on-chips (Jalili-Fir-
oozinezhad et al., 2019). Organoids can be used to assess barrier
integrity effects of individual species and the responsible com-
pounds in a highly controlled way. This has been demonstrated
using, among others, different strains of Clostridium difﬁcile and
the responsible toxin TcdA (Tao et al., 2016). Even without the
use of a ﬂuorescent dye, the induction of pores in an organoid
monolayer can be assessed by microscopy. This has recently
been demonstrated for Klebsiella pneumoniae, which causes
such pore formation by inducing caspase-3-mediated cell death
in colon organoid monolayers (Nakamoto et al., 2019). Another
often-used method to assess epithelial barrier integrity is the mea-
surement of trans-epithelial electrical resistance (TEER), which
can be readily implemented on monolayer cultures and organs-
on-chips (Henry et al., 2017; In et al., 2016; Naumovska et al.,
2020; Sasaki et al., 2020), but not easily in 3D organoids. Using in-
testine-chips, both barrier-protective and -disruptive bacterial ef-
fects can be studied in a scalable and robust manner (Kim et al.,
2016; Shin and Kim, 2018). Taken together, these features give in-
testines-on-a-chip an edge over other in vitro models for system-
atic studies on barrier integrity.

Pattern recognition and inﬂammation
One of the most intensely studied microbial interactions in the
human intestine is the crosstalk with the mucosal immune sys-
tem (Round and Mazmanian, 2009). The recognition of patho-
gens by epithelial cells and subsequent induction of an inﬂam-
matory response is a crucial step in this process. Basolateral
exposure to bacterial components such as LPS, frequently
occurring in case of disrupted barrier function of the epithelium,
can trigger the release of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines by epithe-
lial cells.

Epithelial in vitro models are well suited to uncover the pro-
and anti-inﬂammatory effects of bacterial species and their com-
ponents in intact or disrupted gut architecture. Transcriptional
readouts such as qPCR and RNA sequencing is the most acces-
sible means by which to proﬁle the nature of inﬂammatory re-
sponses in any in vitro model system. Especially, the compre-
hensiveness of RNA sequencing can permit detailed insights
into the type of immune response, which is induced in organoids
by triggers such as viral infection (Chang-Graham et al., 2020;
Drummond et al., 2017; Lamers et al., 2020).

A key advantage of adult stem-cell-derived organoids is their
recapitulation of regional identity, which can play an important
role in the kind of innate inﬂammatory response triggered upon
bacterial exposure (Kayisoglu et al., 2021).
Intestines-on-a-
chip have proven well suited to studying inﬂammatory processes
(Naumovska et al., 2020; Shin and Kim, 2018). Thus, the secre-
tion of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines by a DSS-pretreated intesti-
nal
layer in response to E. coli and LPS exposure could be
measured, as well as the protective effect of a pretreatment
with probiotic bacteria (Shin and Kim, 2018). Human organotypic
explant cultures were employed to study the prohibitive effects
of initial bacterial load on fecal microbial transplant engraftment
in the context of IBD (Sarrabayrouse et al., 2020). In this study,

Review

the mucosal layer was exposed ex vivo to microbial donor mate-
rial. This setup demonstrated reduced engraftment of anti-in-
ﬂammatory microbial transplants and consequently higher levels
of pro-inﬂammatory cytokine secretion in recipients with a high
initial mucosal bacterial
load. In a separate study, ileal and
colonic explants of mice treated with the probiotic Lactobacillus
keﬁri showed a decreased inﬂammatory response upon LPS
stimulation, highlighting the utility of explant models to investi-
gate anti-inﬂammatory effects of in vivo treatments using an
ex vivo system (Carasi et al., 2015).

A recently published virology study showed that the infection
of intestinal organoids with rotavirus induced a paracrine ADP/
calcium signal through P2Y1 receptors that led to a deleterious
inﬂammatory response (Chang-Graham et al., 2020). The suit-
ability of an in vitro system for inﬂammation studies is therefore
highly context dependent, with an advantage for organs-on-
chips where spatial control is important.

MICROBIAL INTERACTIONS WITH THE EPITHELIUM

Adhesion & invasion
The adhesion to and invasion of epithelial cells by viruses, bacte-
ria, and eukaryotic parasites constitutes an important step in the
life cycle and pathogenic mechanisms of these microbes. By faith-
ful representation of cellular heterogeneity, entry receptor expres-
sion patterns, and the possibility to rapidly generate genetically
engineered lines, organoids are emerging as a key model for dis-
entangling pathogen invasion mechanisms.

Invasion assays using organoids rely on standard protocols es-
tablished for 2D cell line invasion studies, most notably the genta-
micin protection assay (Koestler et al., 2019; Rubinstein et al.,
2013). In this assay, a short-term treatment with the non-perme-
able antibiotic gentamicin kills extracellular bacteria while intracel-
lular microbes are protected. In elegant studies on 2D cultures of
human colon organoids, the invasion processes of pathogenic
Shigella ﬂexneri could be studied (Koestler et al., 2019). The polar-
ized monolayer allowed detailed studies on the basolateral inva-
sion preference of Shigella, as well as apical translocations through
disrupted tight junctions. In another study, the importance of M-
cell representation and regional identity of human organoid mono-
layers for Shigella infection was demonstrated (Ranganathan et al.,
2019). Similarly, the invasion of EHEC could be studied in a 2D co-
lonocyte model based on ASCs (In et al., 2016). Modiﬁed versions
of the gentamicin protection assay have been developed for 3D or-
ganoid co-culture assays. These include freeing the organoids
from BME and the mechanical disruption of their 3D structure,
exposing the otherwise protected organoid apical surface before
gentamicin treatment (Forbester et al., 2015). As a result, PSC-
derived human intestinal organoids enabled studies on the inva-
sion mechanism of S. Typhimurium (Forbester et al., 2015). While
less commonly applied than organoids,
intestines-on-a-chip
have also been used for detailed invasion studies. Using ﬂuores-
cently labeled Shigella, apical invasion into the crypt compartment
of Caco-2 cells grown on a chip device was detected (Grassart
et al., 2019). The dependence on peristalsis of the intestinal layer
for this invasion highlights a key advantage of intestines-on-a-
chip for host-microbe studies and underlines the potential for
further developments of organ-on-chip technology in the area of
microbial invasion. A key obstacle for microbes to attach to the

ll

epithelium is the mucus layer, a difﬁcult feature to faithfully repre-
sent in cell lines and some organoid models. Murine organotypic
explants were used to study this process in detail, showing how
S. Typhimurium can access the cecal epithelium through holes in
the mucus layer, which are absent in other gut regions (Furter
et al., 2019).

Pathogen replication and life cycle
To date, organoids provide the most faithful recapitulation of in-
testinal cell types and have enabled pioneering studies on
in vitro propagation and the study of several pathogens. Such
cell-type representation can be crucial in case of speciﬁc tro-
pisms by pathogens. As one example, human noroviruses
have been notoriously hard to study, as they require entero-
cytes and bile for entry and replication. Human intestinal orga-
noids, grown as a 2D layer and differentiated toward entero-
cytes, enabled, for the ﬁrst time, the propagation of this virus
in vitro, laying the groundwork for future studies on noroviruses
(Ettayebi et al., 2016). As another example, an adult stem-cell-
based human small intestinal organoid model exhibited better
infection rates of echovirus 11 when differentiation was driven
toward cells of the secretory lineage, in particular enteroendo-
crine cells (Drummond et al., 2017). In case of unknown tropism
of a pathogen, the ability to grow organoids from almost every
epithelial human tissue enables sophisticated comparative
studies. This has been done, for example, in case of the human
bocavirus, which, using organoids, was demonstrated to infect
both human airway and intestinal epithelial cells (Fakhiri et al.,
2019). More recently, human intestinal organoids enabled the
identiﬁcation of enterocytes and their progenitors as intestinal
target cells of the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus (Lamers et al.,
2020). This study highlights the rapid pace at which viral target
cells, the epithelial response, and other features can be as-
sessed using organoids. For SARS-CoV-2 virus, organoids
even enabled comparative studies between species such as
bats and humans (Zhou et al., 2020).

PSC-based organoids enabled the detection of both epithelial
and non-epithelial target cell types for rotaviruses (Finkbeiner
et al., 2012). A comprehensive study on the infection of human
small intestinal explants and organoids revealed that the MERS
coronavirus could infect several intestinal cell types and repli-
cate in these (Zhou et al., 2017).

Target cell-type identiﬁcation for pathogen propagation is of
particular importance for virus infections studies, but not limited
to them. Recent work has demonstrated the possibility to reca-
pitulate complex life cycles of eukaryotic parasites. This is the
case for Cryptosporidium parvum and Trichuris muris, which
were studied using adult stem-cell-derived human and mouse
intestinal organoids, respectively, grown in 3D (Heo et al.,
2018; Duque-Correa et al., 2020). Cryptosporidium parvum
could also be studied on intestinal monolayers at an air-liquid
interface (Wilke et al., 2019) and had recently been transferred
to an intestine-on-a-chip device, paving the way for long-term
studies (Nikolaev et al., 2020).

CURRENT TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Beyond the signiﬁcant progress in modeling these numerous
interaction processes in vitro, important hurdles still need to be

Cell Host & Microbe 29, June 9, 2021 873

ll

Review

Complex comunity dynamics

Chronic infection model

Immune
cells

Mesenchymal 
cells

 Enteric
neurons

Diff.

SC

Bacterial effect on drug sensitivity

Different intestinal cell types

Complex tissue architecture

Figure 3. Trends and future perspectives for in vitro gut-microbe co-cultures
Top left: bacterial community interactions with each other and the epithelium. Bottom left: Drug metabolization and epithelial response modulation by microbes.
Middle: incorporation of further microenvironmental components into organoids and intestines-on-chip. Top right: extended cultures for chronic infection
modeling in organoids. Bottom right: increasing architectural complexity by organizing the relevant cell types in a crypt-villus architecture.

overcome to recapitulate gut-microbe relationships at even
greater detail. In this section, we discuss recent efforts to add
further complexity and highlight remaining challenges for epithe-
lial co-cultures (Figure 3).

Other microenvironment components
Despite the many beneﬁts of modeling direct epithelium-
microbe interactions in vitro, most current approaches are not
suited to including additional components of the microenviron-
ment. The immune effects of gut microbiota have especially
been the subject of intense study (Round and Mazmanian,
2009) and remain hard to disentangle in vitro. Intestinal organo-
ids have proven adequate model systems for studying the inﬂu-
ences of the immune environment on epithelial behavior (Linde-
mans et al., 2015). The addition of microbes to this equation
in vitro is still relatively new but early examples highlight the po-
tential of co-cultures incorporating all three components. For
example, the protective effect of the probiotic Lactobacillus
intestinal organoids challenged with
reuteri on mouse small
TNF-a could be demonstrated (Hou et al., 2018), as well as a
role of Klebsiella pneumoniae in TH17-mediated inﬂammatory
liver injuries (Nakamoto et al., 2019). Furthermore, gastric orga-
noids were used to assess PD-L1 expression and autologous
cytotoxic T lymphocyte activity upon H. pylori infection and im-
mune-checkpoint
inhibition (Holokai et al., 2019). As an
example of viral effects on immune cell interactions, the recruit-
ment of neutrophils in response to respiratory syncytial virus
infection could be studied in airway organoids (Sachs
et al., 2019).

Intestines-on-a-chip are becoming increasingly useful
for
these studies, as demonstrated by their recent use to study
the recruitment of leukocytes upon luminal stimulation with
LPS (Maurer et al., 2019), recapitulating a key process of IBD
pathogenesis. The role of mesenchymal cell populations in
shaping the gut microﬂora through induction of M-cell differen-
tiation and IgA production has become apparent (Nagashima
et al., 2017), and faithful in vitro models are wanting in order
to study the precise nature of these interactions. Organoid
co-cultures have been successfully established with CD8+

874 Cell Host & Microbe 29, June 9, 2021

T cells (Dijkstra et al., 2018), subepithelial myoﬁbroblasts (Grei-
cius et al., 2018), and macrophages (Noel et al., 2017). New
generations of
intestines-on-chips additionally incorporate
blood vessels in a basolateral channel, contributing a controlled
oxygen gradient across the epithelial layer (Jalili-Firoozinezhad
et al., 2019).

Complex architecture
The intestinal architecture varies greatly along its rostral-caudal
axis with regard to crypt-villus unit organization, cell-type
composition, luminal oxygen levels, and protection by heteroge-
neous mucus layers. Together with other factors, this results in
divergent microbiotas inhabiting various niches in each section
of the gut (Donaldson et al., 2016). The organization of microbes
in bioﬁlms and other spatially deﬁned communities is another
feature not yet
represented in current models (Domingue
et al., 2020).

The Caco-2 cell line, derived from a colorectal adenocarci-
noma and recapitulating some features of enterocytes, has
served as a gold standard for many monolayer and
intestine-on-chip studies (Sambuy et al., 2005). While Caco-
2 cells can generate crypt-villus-like structures under ﬂow
conditions (Kim et al., 2016), they inevitably have limitations
in recapitulating the regional and architectural nuances of
epithelium-microbiota interactions. Organoids have enabled
the culture of all segments of the gastrointestinal tract and
have contributed to the understanding of microbial effects be-
tween the various cell types of crypt and villus compartments
(Kaiko et al., 2016).

Microbial community dynamics
The gut microbiota represents an immensely complex
ecosystem. Intestinal microbes are intricately connected by
resource interdependencies and extensive metabolic networks,
leading to competitive, mutualistic, or symbiotic behaviors
(Stubbendieck et al., 2016). In contrast, simplistic models of sin-
gle-microbe effects can easily exaggerate the impact of individ-
ual gut microbiota (Walter et al., 2020), underscoring the beneﬁt
of investigating microbial communities.

Review

Growing complex intestinal bacterial communities in vitro is
feasible (Oliphant et al., 2020; Van den Abbeele et al., 2010),
but establishing media and oxygen conditions, under which
both epithelial cells and bacteria with diverse requirements
thrive, presents a formidable challenge. Consequently, the sta-
ble culture of complex microbial communities in lumen organo-
ids has not been achieved to date. However, different groups
have pioneered the use of intestine-on-a-chip platforms for
maintaining deﬁned bacterial communities of several species
over the time frame of days to weeks (Kim et al., 2016; Marzorati
et al., 2014). More recent studies on novel chip models demon-
strate the possibility to maintain a diverse community of more
than 200 operational taxonomic units over several days in culture
(Jalili-Firoozinezhad et al., 2019).
In this study, an oxygen
gradient from the basal to the luminal side of an intestine-on-a-
chip channel allowed the culture of both aerobes and obligate
anaerobes and the assessment of parameters such as barrier
integrity. These models will likely facilitate future work on micro-
bial relationships in the context of the gut epithelium (Lu et al.,
2020). Currently, the protective effect of Lactobacillus rhamno-
sus on Candida albicans infections could be modeled on an in-
testine chip (Maurer et al., 2019).

Drug screens
Organoids and organs-on-chips have reached a scalability
which allows screening of therapeutic compounds. The current
COVID-19 pandemic underscores the need for rapid develop-
ment and testing of therapeutics targeted at microbial infection
of and replication within host epithelial cells. Recent work high-
lights the feasibility of these efforts (Lamers et al., 2020; Yin
et al., 2015) and we expect
that standardized and high-
throughput (Williamson et al., 2018) organoid-microbe co-cul-
ture workﬂows will enable systematic screening for infectious
disease drugs, in the near future. Considering other diseases
such as cancer, the importance of the gut microbiota for drug
metabolization (Geller et al., 2017; Zimmermann et al., 2019)
and host response to drugs (Yu et al., 2017) have been the sub-
ject of pioneering studies. We anticipate that the combination of
organoids and microbes will open up new avenues for host-
microbe co-metabolism studies and help understand microbially
modiﬁed treatment responses. Finally, organs-on-chips are
rapidly being adopted for drug screening in diverse settings
(Beaurivage et al., 2019), including processes important for mi-
crobial interactions such as barrier integrity (Bhatt et al., 2018).

FUTURE OUTLOOK

Our understanding of the important role that the microbiota plays
in the maintenance of intestinal homeostasis and in the develop-
ment of disease has been transformed in the last century. How-
ever, it remains difﬁcult to move from the associations uncov-
ered by metagenomic studies to insights into the mechanistic
roles of the microbiota. The development of human intestinal or-
ganoids and their incorporation into more elaborate organ-on-a-
chip setups have led to innovative avenues for evaluating the
relationship between the intestinal mucosa and its microbiota.
Although still in its infancy, this ﬁeld has already yielded some
key discoveries into how the microbiota contributes to health
and disease, recapitulating several human-speciﬁc features in

ll

processes like viral
infection and replication (Ettayebi et al.,
2016; Lamers et al., 2020). As a result, several biotechnology
companies have developed or adopted organoids and organs-
on-a-chip for their preclinical testing. In particular, companies
such as Emulate, MIMETAS, or Altis Biosystems have pioneered
intestine-on-a-chip models well suited for scalable microbe co-
cultures. A comprehensive overview of the commercial activity
in the ﬁelds of organoids and organs-on-chips can be found in
two recent reviews (Allwardt et al., 2020; Choudhury et al., 2020).
Choosing the right in vitro model for host-microbe studies de-
pends on the microbe but even more so on the envisioned read-
outs. As viruses are dependent on a host cell for replication, gen-
eration of the right target cell type(s) is of paramount importance.
For bacterial co-cultures, the divergent requirements regarding
oxygen levels, nutrients, and spatial organization pose the
incorporates all
main challenges. No current in vitro model
potentially relevant microenvironmental components, which
would allow a complete recapitulation of the in vivo situation,
instead, each current model is suitable for modeling only some
interactions. The studies highlighted in this review and summa-
rized in Table 1 showcase the advantages of each in vitro intes-
tine model. Cell lines remain useful in standardized and scalable
assays, both as monolayers and on chip architectures. However,
the increasing availability of adult stem-cell-derived organoids
for growth in these formats will likely replace cell lines in many
assays. Organotypic explant cultures are the most straightfor-
ward way to retain the tissue architecture ex vivo for short time
frames and can be a crucial technology when this feature is of
importance. The lack of experimental control and the repeated
requirement for biopsy material limit their application. We antic-
ipate a continuous move toward adult stem-cell-based systems,
both as organoids and intestines-on-a-chip because of their
incorporation of diverse and mature intestinal cell types. In
recent years, intestines-on-a-chip have improved dramatically
in the control of gradients and of cellular representation, being
the model of choice when spatial control of exposure, architec-
ture, ﬂow, and movement are of importance. iPSC-derived orga-
noids allow complex mixtures of cells to be cultured and have
proven suitable for infection studies and on organ-on-chip de-
vices. ASC-based organoids are most suitable to studies where
faithful representation of cell-type composition and regional
identity is needed or when interindividual differences need to
be studied with reasonable scalability. Their comparative ease-
of-derivation and -use and experimental tractability make them
a ﬂexible in vitro model for co-culture studies.

The ﬁeld is rapidly moving from the most reductionist ap-
proaches, where the effect of a single microbial species on the
epithelium is studied, to more elaborate setups. These will
include complex bacterial communities from healthy or diseased
individuals as well as other components of the intestinal mucosa
like immune cells, the mesenchyme, or enteric neurons. We
anticipate that these approaches will allow the establishment
of chronic models of microbial co-cultures for studying diseases
like IBD or colorectal cancer.

Finally, the intestinal microenvironment is an immensely com-
plex system, and in vivo models remain the only option to study
systemic effects at this moment. Nevertheless, there is no con-
ceptual boundary that would prevent the stepwise reassembly
of this system based on a growing understanding of cell types’

Cell Host & Microbe 29, June 9, 2021 875

ll

Review

requirements and their interplay. As a result, organoids and or-
gans-on-chips are set to play a growing role in disentangling
host-microbe interactions in vitro.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a CRUK grant OPTIMISTIC (C10674/A27140), the
Netherlands Organ-on-Chip Initiative (024.003.001) from the Netherlands Or-
ganization for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO), Culture and Science of the Govern-
ment of the Netherlands, the Oncode Institute (partly ﬁnanced by the Dutch
Cancer Society) the European Research Council under ERC Advanced grant
agreement no. 67013.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

H.C. is an inventor on multiple patents held by the Dutch Royal Netherlands
Academy of Arts and Sciences that cover organoid technology. H.C. is a mem-
ber of the board of directors of Roche. H.C.’s full disclosure is given at https://
www.uu.nl/staff/JCClevers/. J.P. and C.P.-M. declare no competing interests.

REFERENCES

Allwardt, V., Ainscough, A.J., Viswanathan, P., Sherrod, S.D., McLean, J.A.,
Haddrick, M., and Pensabene, V. (2020). Translational roadmap for the or-
gans-on-a-chip industry toward broad adoption. Bioengineering (Basel)
7, 112.

Bartfeld, S. (2016). Modeling infectious diseases and host-microbe interac-
tions in gastrointestinal organoids. Dev. Biol. 420, 262–270.

Choudhury, D., Ashok, A., and Naing, M.W. (2020). Commercialization of orga-
noids. Trends Mol. Med. 26, 245–249.

Dejea, C.M., Fathi, P., Craig, J.M., Boleij, A., Taddese, R., Geis, A.L., Wu, X.,
DeStefano Shields, C.E., Hechenbleikner, E.M., Huso, D.L., et al. (2018). Pa-
tients with familial adenomatous polyposis harbor colonic bioﬁlms containing
tumorigenic bacteria. Science 359, 592–597.

Dijkstra, K.K., Cattaneo, C.M., Weeber, F., Chalabi, M., van de Haar, J., Fan-
chi, L.F., Slagter, M., van der Velden, D.L., Kaing, S., Kelderman, S., et al.
(2018). Generation of tumor-reactive T cells by co-culture of peripheral blood
lymphocytes and tumor organoids. Cell 174, 1586–1598.e12.

DiMarco, R.L., Su, J., Yan, K.S., Dewi, R., Kuo, C.J., and Heilshorn, S.C.
(2014). Engineering of three-dimensional microenvironments to promote con-
tractile behavior in primary intestinal organoids.
(Camb) 6,
127–142.

Integr. Biol.

Domingue, J.C., Drewes, J.L., Merlo, C.A., Housseau, F., and Sears, C.L.
(2020). Host responses to mucosal bioﬁlms in the lung and gut. Mucosal Im-
munol 13, 413–422.

Donaldson, G.P., Lee, S.M., and Mazmanian, S.K. (2016). Gut biogeography of
the bacterial microbiota. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 14, 20–32.

Drummond, C.G., Bolock, A.M., Ma, C., Luke, C.J., Good, M., and Coyne, C.B.
(2017). Enteroviruses infect human enteroids and induce antiviral signaling in a
cell lineage-speciﬁc manner. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, 1672–1677.

Duque-Correa, M.A., Schreiber, F., Rodgers, F.H., Goulding, D., Forrest, S.,
White, R., Buck, A., Grencis, R.K., and Berriman, M. (2020). Development of
caecaloids to study host–pathogen interactions: new insights into immunoreg-
ulatory functions of Trichuris muris extracellular vesicles in the caecum. Int. J.
Parasitol. 50, 707–718.

Bauer, M., Nascakova, Z., Mihai, A.I., Cheng, P.F., Levesque, M.P., Lampart,
S., Hurwitz, R., Pfannkuch, L., Dobrovolna, J., Jacobs, M., et al. (2020). The
ALPK1/TIFA/NF-kB axis links a bacterial carcinogen to R-loop-induced repli-
cation stress. Nat. Commun. 11, 5117.

Dziuba(cid:1)nska-Kusibab, P.J., Berger, H., Battistini, F., Bouwman, B.A.M., Ifte-
khar, A., Katainen, R., Cajuso, T., Crosetto, N., Orozco, M., Aaltonen, L.A.,
and Meyer, T.F. (2020). Colibactin DNA-damage signature indicates muta-
tional impact in colorectal cancer. Nat. Med. 26, 1063–1069.

Beaurivage, C., Naumovska, E., Chang, Y.X., Elstak, E.D., Nicolas, A.,
Wouters, H., van Moolenbroek, G., Lanz, H.L., Trietsch, S.J., Joore, J., et al.
(2019). Development of a gut-on-a-chip model for high throughput disease
modeling and drug discovery. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 5661.

Engevik, M.A., Aihara, E., Montrose, M.H., Shull, G.E., Hassett, D.J., and Wor-
rell, R.T. (2013). Loss of NHE3 alters gut microbiota composition and inﬂu-
ences Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron growth. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest.
Liver Physiol. 305, G697–G711.

Bein, A., Shin, W., Jalili-Firoozinezhad, S., Park, M.H., Sontheimer-Phelps, A.,
Tovaglieri, A., Chalkiadaki, A., Kim, H.J., and Ingber, D.E. (2018). Microﬂuidic
Organ-on-a-chip models of human intestine. Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepa-
tol. 5, 659–668.

Ettayebi, K., Crawford, S.E., Murakami, K., Broughman, J.R., Karandikar, U.,
Tenge, V.R., Neill, F.H., Blutt, S.E., Zeng, X.L., Qu, L., et al. (2016). Replication
of human noroviruses in stem cell-derived human enteroids. Science 353,
1387–1393.

Beumer, J., Puschhof, J., Bauza´ -Martinez, J., Martı´nez-Silgado, A., Elmen-
taite, R., James, K.R., Ross, A., Hendriks, D., Artegiani, B., Busslinger, G.A.,
et al. (2020). High-resolution mRNA and secretome atlas of human enteroen-
docrine cells. Cell 181, 1291–1306, e19.

Fakhiri, J., Schneider, M.A., Puschhof, J., Stanifer, M., Schildgen, V., Holder-
bach, S., Voss, Y., El Andari, J., Schildgen, O., Boulant, S., et al. (2019). Novel
chimeric gene therapy vectors based on adeno-associated virus and four
different mammalian bocaviruses. Mol. Ther. Methods Clin. Dev. 12, 202–222.

Bhatt, A.P., Gunasekara, D.B., Speer, J., Reed, M.I., Pen˜ a, A.N., Midkiff, B.R.,
Magness, S.T., Bultman, S.J., Allbritton, N.L., and Redinbo, M.R. (2018).
Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug-induced leaky gut modeled using polar-
ized monolayers of primary human intestinal epithelial cells. ACS Infect. Dis.
4, 46–52.

Blokzijl, F., de Ligt, J., Jager, M., Sasselli, V., Roerink, S., Sasaki, N., Huch, M.,
Boymans, S., Kuijk, E., Prins, P., et al. (2016). Tissue-speciﬁc mutation accu-
mulation in human adult stem cells during life. Nature 538, 260–264.

Boccellato, F., Woelfﬂing, S., Imai-Matsushima, A., Sanchez, G., Goosmann,
C., Schmid, M., Berger, H., Morey, P., Denecke, C., Ordemann, J., and Meyer,
T.F. (2019). Polarised epithelial monolayers of the gastric mucosa reveal in-
sights into mucosal homeostasis and defence against infection. Gut 68,
400–413.

Bossuet-Greif, N., Vignard, J., Taieb, F., Mirey, G., Dubois, D., Petit, C., Os-
wald, E., and Nougayre` de, J.P. (2018). The colibactin genotoxin generates
DNA interstrand cross-links in infected cells. mBio 9, e02393–17.

Carasi, P., Racedo, S.M., Jacquot, C., Romanin, D.E., Serradell, M.A., and Ur-
daci, M.C. (2015). Impact of keﬁr derived Lactobacillus keﬁri on the mucosal
immune response and gut microbiota. J. Immunol. Res. 2015, 361604.

Chang-Graham, A.L., Perry, J.L., Engevik, M.A., Engevik, K.A., Scribano, F.J.,
Gebert, J.T., Danhof, H.A., Nelson, J.C., Kellen, J.S., Strtak, A.C., et al. (2020).
Rotavirus induces intercellular calcium waves through ADP signaling. Sci-
ence 370.

Finkbeiner, S.R., Zeng, X.L., Utama, B., Atmar, R.L., Shroyer, N.F., and Estes,
M.K. (2012). Stem cell-derived human intestinal organoids as an infection
model for rotaviruses. mBio 3, e00159–e00112.

Fletcher, P.S., Elliott, J., Grivel, J.C., Margolis, L., Anton, P., McGowan, I., and
Shattock, R.J. (2006). Ex vivo culture of human colorectal tissue for the evalu-
ation of candidate microbicides. AIDS Lond. Engl. 20, 1237–1245.

Forbester, J.L., Goulding, D., Vallier, L., Hannan, N., Hale, C., Pickard, D., Mu-
khopadhyay, S., and Dougan, G. (2015). Interaction of Salmonella enterica se-
rovar Typhimurium with intestinal organoids derived from human induced
pluripotent stem cells. Infect. Immun. 83, 2926–2934.

Fujii, M., Matano, M., Nanki, K., and Sato, T. (2015). Efﬁcient genetic engineer-
ing of human intestinal organoids using electroporation. Nat. Protoc. 10,
1474–1485.

Furter, M., Sellin, M.E., Hansson, G.C., and Hardt, W.D. (2019). Mucus archi-
tecture and near-surface swimming affect distinct Salmonella typhimurium
infection patterns along the murine intestinal tract. Cell Rep 27, 2665–2678.e3.

Geller, L.T., Barzily-Rokni, M., Danino, T., Jonas, O.H., Shental, N., Nejman,
D., Gavert, N., Zwang, Y., Cooper, Z.A., Shee, K., et al. (2017). Potential role
of intratumor bacteria in mediating tumor resistance to the chemotherapeutic
drug gemcitabine. Science 357, 1156–1160.

Grassart, A., Malarde´ , V., Gobaa, S., Sartori-Rupp, A., Kerns, J., Karalis, K.,
Marteyn, B., Sansonetti, P., and Sauvonnet, N. (2019). Bioengineered human

876 Cell Host & Microbe 29, June 9, 2021

Review

Organ-on-chip reveals intestinal microenvironment and mechanical forces im-
pacting Shigella infection. Cell Host Microbe 26, 565.

Greicius, G., Kabiri, Z., Sigmundsson, K., Liang, C., Bunte, R., Singh, M.K., and
Virshup, D.M. (2018). PDGFRa+ pericryptal stromal cells are the critical source
of Wnts and RSPO3 for murine intestinal stem cells in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 115, E3173–E3181.

Gr€un, D., Lyubimova, A., Kester, L., Wiebrands, K., Basak, O., Sasaki, N.,
Clevers, H., and van Oudenaarden, A. (2015). Single-cell messenger RNA
sequencing reveals rare intestinal cell types. Nature 525, 251–255.

Gustafsson, J.K., Ermund, A., Johansson, M.E.V., Sch€utte, A., Hansson, G.C.,
and Sjo¨ vall, H. (2012). An ex vivo method for studying mucus formation, prop-
erties, and thickness in human colonic biopsies and mouse small and large in-
testinal explants. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 302, G430–G438.

Henry, O.Y.F., Villenave, R., Cronce, M.J., Leineweber, W.D., Benz, M.A., and
Ingber, D.E. (2017). Organs-on-Chips with integrated electrodes for Trans-
Epithelial Electrical Resistance (TEER) measurements of human epithelial bar-
rier function. Lab Chip 17, 2264–2271.

Heo, I., Dutta, D., Schaefer, D.A., Iakobachvili, N., Artegiani, B., Sachs, N.,
Boonekamp, K.E., Bowden, G., Hendrickx, A.P.A., Willems, R.J.L., et al.
(2018). Modelling Cryptosporidium infection in human small
intestinal and
lung organoids. Nat. Microbiol. 3, 814–823.

Hill, D.R., Huang, S., Nagy, M.S., Yadagiri, V.K., Fields, C., Mukherjee, D.,
Bons, B., Dedhia, P.H., Chin, A.M., Tsai, Y.-H., et al. (2017). Bacterial coloni-
zation stimulates a complex physiological response in the immature human in-
testinal epithelium. eLife 6, e29132.

Hinman, S.S., Wang, Y., and Allbritton, N.L. (2019). Photopatterned mem-
branes and chemical gradients enable scalable phenotypic organization of pri-
mary human colon epithelial models. Anal. Chem. 91, 15240–15247.

Holokai, L., Chakrabarti, J., Broda, T., Chang, J., Hawkins, J.A., Sundaram, N.,
Wroblewski, L.E., Peek, R.M., Wang, J., Helmrath, M., et al. (2019). Increased
programmed death-ligand 1 is an early epithelial cell response to Helicobacter
pylori infection. PLoS Pathog 15, e1007468.

Hou, Q., Ye, L., Liu, H., Huang, L., Yang, Q., Turner, J.R., and Yu, Q. (2018).
Lactobacillus accelerates ISCs regeneration to protect the integrity of intesti-
nal mucosa through activation of STAT3 signaling pathway induced by LPLs
secretion of IL-22. Cell Death Differ 25, 1657–1670.

Iftekhar, A., Berger, H., Bouznad, N., Heuberger, J., Boccellato, F., Dobrindt,
U., Hermeking, H., Sigal, M., and Meyer, T.F. (2021). Genomic aberrations after
short-term exposure to colibactin-producing E. coli transform primary colon
epithelial cells. Nat. Commun. 12, 1003.

In, J., Foulke-Abel, J., Zachos, N.C., Hansen, A.M., Kaper, J.B., Bernstein,
H.D., Halushka, M., Blutt, S., Estes, M.K., Donowitz, M., and Kovbasnjuk, O.
(2016). Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli reduce mucus and intermicrovillar
bridges in human stem cell-derived colonoids. Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hep-
atol. 2, 48–62.e3.

Jalili-Firoozinezhad, S., Gazzaniga, F.S., Calamari, E.L., Camacho, D.M., Fa-
del, C.W., Bein, A., Swenor, B., Nestor, B., Cronce, M.J., Tovaglieri, A., et al.
(2019). A complex human gut microbiome cultured in an anaerobic intestine-
on-a-chip. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 3, 520–531.

Kaiko, G.E., Ryu, S.H., Koues, O.I., Collins, P.L., Solnica-Krezel, L., Pearce,
E.J., Pearce, E.L., Oltz, E.M., and Stappenbeck, T.S. (2016). The colonic crypt
protects stem cells from microbiota-derived metabolites. Cell 165, 1708–1720.

Kayisoglu, O., Weiss, F., Niklas, C., Pierotti, I., Pompaiah, M., Wallaschek, N.,
Germer, C.T., Wiegering, A., and Bartfeld, S. (2021). Location-speciﬁc cell
identity rather than exposure to GI microbiota deﬁnes many innate immune
signalling cascades in the gut epithelium. Gut 70, 687–697.

Kim, H.J., Huh, D., Hamilton, G., and Ingber, D.E. (2012). Human gut-on-a-chip
inhabited by microbial ﬂora that experiences intestinal peristalsis-like motions
and ﬂow. Lab Chip 12, 2165–2174.

Kim, H.J., Li, H., Collins, J.J., and Ingber, D.E. (2016). Contributions of micro-
biome and mechanical deformation to intestinal bacterial overgrowth and
inﬂammation in a human gut-on-a-chip. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113,
E7–E15.

Kim, J., Koo, B.K., and Knoblich, J.A. (2020). Human organoids: model sys-
tems for human biology and medicine. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 21, 571–584.

ll

Kim, R., Attayek, P.J., Wang, Y., Furtado, K.L., Tamayo, R., Sims, C.E., and All-
britton, N.L. (2019). An in vitro intestinal platform with a self-sustaining oxygen
gradient to study the human gut/microbiome interface. Biofabrication 12,
015006.

Koestler, B.J., Ward, C.M., Fisher, C.R., Rajan, A., Maresso, A.W., and Payne,
S.M. (2019). Human intestinal enteroids as a model system of Shigella patho-
genesis. Infect. Immun. 87, e00733–18.

Lamers, M.M., Beumer, J., Vaart, J. van der, Knoops, K., Puschhof, J., Breu-
gem, T.I., Ravelli, R.B.G., Paul van Schayck, J.P. van, Mykytyn, A.Z., Duimel,
H.Q., et al. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 productively infects human gut enterocytes.
Science 369, 50–54.

Leslie, J.L., Huang, S., Opp, J.S., Nagy, M.S., Kobayashi, M., Young, V.B., and
Spence, J.R. (2015). Persistence and toxin production by Clostridium difﬁcile
within human intestinal organoids result in disruption of epithelial paracellular
barrier function. Infect. Immun. 83, 138–145.

Lindemans, C.A., Calaﬁore, M., Mertelsmann, A.M., O’Connor, M.H., Duda-
kov, J.A., Jenq, R.R., Velardi, E., Young, L.F., Smith, O.M., Lawrence, G.,
et al. (2015). Interleukin-22 promotes intestinal-stem-cell-mediated epithelial
regeneration. Nature 528, 560–564.

Lu, X., Xie, S., Ye, L., Zhu, L., and Yu, Q. (2020). Lactobacillus protects Against
S. Typhimurium–induced intestinal inﬂammation by determining the fate of
epithelial proliferation and differentiation. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 64, e1900655.

Lukovac, S., Belzer, C., Pellis, L., Keijser, B.J., de Vos, W.M., Montijn, R.C.,
and Roeselers, G. (2014). Differential modulation by Akkermansia muciniphila
and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii of host peripheral lipid metabolism and his-
tone acetylation in mouse gut organoids. mBio 5, e01438-–14.

Martini, E., Krug, S.M., Siegmund, B., Neurath, M.F., and Becker, C. (2017).
Mend your fences: the epithelial barrier and its relationship with mucosal im-
munity in inﬂammatory bowel disease. Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol.
4, 33–46.

Marzorati, M., Vanhoecke, B., De Ryck, T., Sadaghian Sadabad, M., Pinheiro,
I., Possemiers, S., Van den Abbeele, P., Derycke, L., Bracke, M., Pieters, J.,
et al. (2014). The HMITM module: a new tool to study the host-microbiota inter-
action in the human gastrointestinal tract in vitro. BMC Microbiol 14, 133.

Maurer, M., Gresnigt, M.S., Last, A., Wollny, T., Berlinghof, F., Pospich, R.,
Cseresnyes, Z., Medyukhina, A., Graf, K., Gro¨ ger, M., et al. (2019). A three-
dimensional immunocompetent intestine-on-chip model as in vitro platform
for functional and microbial interaction studies. Biomaterials 220, 119396.

McCracken, K.W., Cata´ , E.M., Crawford, C.M., Sinagoga, K.L., Schumacher,
M., Rockich, B.E., Tsai, Y.H., Mayhew, C.N., Spence, J.R., Zavros, Y., and
Wells, J.M. (2014). Modelling human development and disease in pluripotent
stem-cell-derived gastric organoids. Nature 516, 400–404.

Mu´ nera, J.O., Sundaram, N., Rankin, S.A., Hill, D., Watson, C., Mahe, M., Val-
lance, J.E., Shroyer, N.F., Sinagoga, K.L., Zarzoso-Lacoste, A., et al. (2017).
Differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into colonic organoids via tran-
sient activation of BMP signaling. Cell Stem Cell 21, 51–64.e6.

Nagashima, K., Sawa, S., Nitta, T., Tsutsumi, M., Okamura, T., Penninger,
J.M., Nakashima, T., and Takayanagi, H. (2017). Identiﬁcation of subepithelial
mesenchymal cells that induce IgA and diversify gut microbiota. Nat. Immunol.
18, 675–682.

Naito, T., Mulet, C., De Castro, C.D., Molinaro, A., Saffarian, A., Nigro, G., Be´ -
rard, M., Clerc, M., Pedersen, A.B., Sansonetti, P.J., and Pe´ dron, T. (2017).
Lipopolysaccharide from crypt-speciﬁc core microbiota modulates the colonic
epithelial proliferation-to-differentiation balance. mBio 8, e01680–17.

Nakamoto, N., Sasaki, N., Aoki, R., Miyamoto, K., Suda, W., Teratani, T., Su-
zuki, T., Koda, Y., Chu, P.S., Taniki, N., et al. (2019). Gut pathobionts underlie
intestinal barrier dysfunction and liver T helper 17 cell immune response in pri-
mary sclerosing cholangitis. Nat. Microbiol. 4, 492–503.

Naumovska, E., Aalderink, G., Wong Valencia, C., Kosim, K., Nicolas, A.,
Brown, S., Vulto, P., Erdmann, K.S., and Kurek, D. (2020). Direct on-chip dif-
ferentiation of intestinal tubules from induced pluripotent stem cells. Int. J.
Mol. Sci. 21, 4964.

Neal, M.D., Sodhi, C.P., Jia, H., Dyer, M., Egan, C.E., Yazji, I., Good, M., Afrazi,
A., Marino, R., Slagle, D., et al. (2012). Toll-like receptor 4 is expressed on in-
testinal stem cells and regulates their proliferation and apoptosis via the p53
up-regulated modulator of apoptosis. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 37296–37308.

Cell Host & Microbe 29, June 9, 2021 877

ll

Nikolaev, M., Mitrofanova, O., Broguiere, N., Geraldo, S., Dutta, D., Tabata, Y.,
Elci, B., Brandenberg, N., Kolotuev, I., Gjorevski, N., et al. (2020). Homeostatic
mini-intestines through scaffold-guided organoid morphogenesis. Nature 585,
574–578.

Noel, G., Baetz, N.W., Staab, J.F., Donowitz, M., Kovbasnjuk, O., Pasetti, M.F.,
and Zachos, N.C. (2017). A primary human macrophage-enteroid co-culture
model to investigate mucosal gut physiology and host-pathogen interactions.
Sci. Rep. 7, 45270.

Nougayre` de, J.P., Homburg, S., Taieb, F., Boury, M., Brzuszkiewicz, E., Gott-
schalk, G., Buchrieser, C., Hacker, J., Dobrindt, U., and Oswald, E. (2006). Es-
cherichia coli Induces DNA double-strand breaks in eukaryotic cells. Science
313, 848–851.

Okkelman, I.A., Neto, N., Papkovsky, D.B., Monaghan, M.G., and Dmitriev, R.I.
(2020). A deeper understanding of intestinal organoid metabolism revealed by
combining ﬂuorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) and extracellular
ﬂux analyses. Redox Biol 30, 101420.

Oliphant, K., Cochrane, K., Schroeter, K., Daigneault, M.C., Yen, S., Verdu,
E.F., and Allen-Vercoe, E. (2020). Effects of antibiotic pretreatment of an ulcer-
ative colitis-derived fecal microbial community on the integration of therapeu-
tic bacteria in vitro. mSystems 5.

Pleguezuelos-Manzano, C., Puschhof, J., Rosendahl Huber, A., van Hoeck, A.,
Wood, H.M., Nomburg, J., Gurjao, C., Manders, F., Dalmasso, G., Stege, P.B.,
et al. (2020). Mutational signature in colorectal cancer caused by genotoxic
pks+ E. coli. Nature 580, 269–273.

Qin, Y., and Wade, P.A. (2018). Crosstalk between the microbiome and epige-
nome: messages from bugs. J. Biochem. 163, 105–112.

Ranganathan, S., Doucet, M., Grassel, C.L., Delaine-Elias, B., Zachos, N.C.,
and Barry, E.M. (2019). Evaluating Shigella ﬂexneri pathogenesis in the human
enteroid model. Infect. Immun. 87, e00740–18.

Round, J.L., and Mazmanian, S.K. (2009). The gut microbiota shapes intestinal
immune responses during health and disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 9, 313–323.

Rubinstein, M.R., Wang, X., Liu, W., Hao, Y., Cai, G., and Han, Y.W. (2013). Fu-
sobacterium nucleatum promotes colorectal carcinogenesis by modulating E-
cadherin/b-catenin signaling via its FadA adhesin. Cell Host Microbe 14,
195–206.

Sachs, N., Papaspyropoulos, A., Zomer-van Ommen, D.D., Heo, I., Bo¨ ttinger,
L., Klay, D., Weeber, F., Huelsz-Prince, G., Iakobachvili, N., Amatngalim, G.D.,
et al. (2019). Long-term expanding human airway organoids for disease
modeling. EMBO J 38.

Sambuy, Y., De Angelis, I., Ranaldi, G., Scarino, M.L., Stammati, A., and
Zucco, F. (2005). The Caco-2 cell line as a model of the intestinal barrier: inﬂu-
ence of cell and culture-related factors on Caco-2 cell functional characteris-
tics. Cell Biol. Toxicol. 21, 1–26.

Sarrabayrouse, G., Landolﬁ, S., Pozuelo, M., Willamil, J., Varela, E., Clark, A.,
Campos, D., Herrera, C., Santiago, A., Machiels, K., et al. (2020). Mucosal mi-
crobial load in Crohn’s disease: a potential predictor of response to faecal mi-
crobiota transplantation. EBiomedicine 51, 102611.

Sasaki, N., Miyamoto, K., Maslowski, K.M., Ohno, H., Kanai, T., and Sato, T.
(2020). Development of a scalable coculture system for gut anaerobes and hu-
man colon epithelium. Gastroenterology 159, 388–390.e5.

Sato, T., Stange, D.E., Ferrante, M., Vries, R.G.J., Van Es, J.H., Van Den Brink,
S., Van Houdt, W.J., Pronk, A., Van Gorp, J., Siersema, P.D., and Clevers, H.
(2011). Long-term expansion of epithelial organoids from human colon, ade-
noma, adenocarcinoma, and Barrett’s epithelium. Gastroenterology 141,
1762–1772.

Scanu, T., Spaapen, R.M., Bakker, J.M., Pratap, C.B., Wu, L.E., Hoﬂand, I.,
Broeks, A., Shukla, V.K., Kumar, M., Janssen, H., et al. (2015). Salmonella
manipulation of host signaling pathways provokes cellular transformation
associated with gallbladder carcinoma. Cell Host Microbe 17, 763–774.

Shah, P., Fritz, J.V., Glaab, E., Desai, M.S., Greenhalgh, K., Frachet, A., Nie-
gowska, M., Estes, M., J€ager, C., Seguin-Devaux, C., et al. (2016). A microﬂui-
dics-based in vitro model of the gastrointestinal human–microbe interface.
Nat. Commun. 7, 11535.

878 Cell Host & Microbe 29, June 9, 2021

Review

Shin, W., and Kim, H.J. (2018). Intestinal barrier dysfunction orchestrates the
onset of inﬂammatory host–microbiome cross-talk in a human gut inﬂamma-
tion-on-a-chip. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, E10539–E10547.

Spence, J.R., Mayhew, C.N., Rankin, S.A., Kuhar, M.F., Vallance, J.E., Tolle,
K., Hoskins, E.E., Kalinichenko, V.V., Wells, S.I., Zorn, A.M., et al. (2011).
Directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into intestinal tissue
in vitro. Nature 470, 105–109.

Stubbendieck, R.M., Vargas-Bautista, C., and Straight, P.D. (2016). Bacterial
communities: interactions to scale. Front. Microbiol. 7, 1234.

Tao, L., Zhang, J., Meraner, P., Tovaglieri, A., Wu, X., Gerhard, R., Zhang, X.,
Stallcup, W.B., Miao, J., He, X., et al. (2016). Frizzled protiens are colonic
epithelial receptors for Clostridium difﬁcile toxin B. Nature 538, 350–355.

Van den Abbeele, P., Grootaert, C., Marzorati, M., Possemiers, S., Verstraete,
W., Ge´ rard, P., Rabot, S., Bruneau, A., El Aidy, S., Derrien, M., et al. (2010). Mi-
crobial community development in a dynamic gut model is reproducible, colon
region speciﬁc, and selective for Bacteroidetes and Clostridium Cluster IX.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76, 5237–5246.

Walter, J., Armet, A.M., Finlay, B.B., and Shanahan, F. (2020). Establishing or
exaggerating causality for the gut microbiome: lessons from human micro-
biota-associated rodents. Cell 180, 221–232.

Wilding, J.L., and Bodmer, W.F. (2014). Cancer cell lines for drug discovery
and development. Cancer Res 74, 2377–2384.

Wilke, G., Funkhouser-Jones, L.J., Wang, Y., Ravindran, S., Wang, Q., Beatty,
W.L., Baldridge, M.T., VanDussen, K.L., Shen, B., Kuhlenschmidt, M.S., et al.
(2019). A stem-cell-derived platform enables complete Cryptosporidium
development
in vitro and genetic tractability. Cell Host Microbe 26,
123–134.e8.

Williamson, I.A., Arnold, J.W., Samsa, L.A., Gaynor, L., DiSalvo, M., Cocchiaro,
J.L., Carroll, I., Azcarate-Peril, M.A., Rawls, J.F., Allbritton, N.L., and Magness,
S.T. (2018). A high-throughput organoid microinjection platform to study
gastrointestinal microbiota and luminal physiology. Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol.
Hepatol. 6, 301–319.

Workman, M.J., Gleeson, J.P., Troisi, E.J., Estrada, H.Q., Kerns, S.J., Hino-
josa, C.D., Hamilton, G.A., Targan, S.R., Svendsen, C.N., and Barrett, R.J.
(2018). Enhanced utilization of induced pluripotent stem cell-derived human in-
testinal organoids using microengineered chips. Cell. Mol. Gastroenterol. Hep-
atol. 5, 669–677.e2.

Yin, Y., Bijvelds, M., Dang, W., Xu, L., van der Eijk, A.A., Knipping, K., Tuysuz,
N., Dekkers, J.F., Wang, Y., de Jonge, J., et al. (2015). Modeling rotavirus
infection and antiviral therapy using primary intestinal organoids. Antiviral
Res 123, 120–131.

Yu, T.C., Guo, F., Yu, Y., Sun, T., Ma, D., Han, J., Qian, Y., Kryczek, I., Sun, D.,
Nagarsheth, N., et al. (2017). Fusobacterium nucleatum promotes chemore-
sistance to colorectal cancer by modulating autophagy. Cell 170, 548–
563.e16.

Zhang, Y.G., Wu, S., Xia, Y., and Sun, J.
crypt-derived intestinal organoid culture system for host–bacterial
tions. Physiol. Rep. 2.

(2014). Salmonella-infected
interac-

Zheng, L., Kelly, C.J., and Colgan, S.P. (2015). Physiologic hypoxia and oxy-
gen homeostasis in the healthy intestine. A Review in the theme: cellular Re-
sponses to Hypoxia. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 309, C350–C360.

Zhou, J., Li, C., Liu, X., Chiu, M.C., Zhao, X., Wang, D., Wei, Y., Lee, A., Zhang,
A.J., Chu, H., et al. (2020). Infection of bat and human intestinal organoids by
SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Med. 26, 1077–1083.

Zhou, J., Li, C., Zhao, G., Chu, H., Wang, D., Yan, H.H.-N., Poon, V.K.-M., Wen,
L., Wong, B.H.-Y., Zhao, X., et al. (2017). Human intestinal tract serves as an
alternative infection route for Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus.
Sci. Adv. 3, eaao4966.

Zimmermann, M., Zimmermann-Kogadeeva, M., Wegmann, R., and
Goodman, A.L. (2019). Mapping human microbiome drug metabolism by gut
bacteria and their genes. Nature 570, 462–467.

