Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

REVIEWS

Pharmaceutical strategies for the
treatment of bacterial bioﬁlms in chronic
wounds
Karan Razdan a,b, Jorge Garcia-Lara c,d,e, V.R. Sinha b,⇑,
Kamalinder K. Singh a,d,e,⇑

)

N
E
E
R
G

(

E
T
O
N
Y
E
K

a School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Clinical and Biomedical Sciences,
University of Central Lancashire, Preston PR1 2HE, UK
b Pharmaceutics Division, University Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
UGC-Centre of Advanced Study, Panjab University, Chandigarh 160014, India
c School of Medicine, Faculty of Clinical and Biomedical Sciences,
University of Central Lancashire, Preston PR1 2HE, UK
d UCLan Research Centre for Smart Materials, University of Central Lancashire,
Preston PR1 2HE, UK
e UCLan Research Centre for Translational Biosciences and Behavior,
University of Central Lancashire, Preston PR1 2HE, UK

are

Bioﬁlms are sessile communities of microorganisms, mainly
bacteria, that grow on biotic and abiotic surfaces. These
microorganisms
embedded within an extracellular
polymeric substance that provides enhanced protection from
antimicrobials. Chronic wounds provide an ideal habitat for
bioﬁlm formation. Bacteria can easily attach to wound debris
and can infect the wound due to an impaired host immune
response. This review highlights the mechanism of bioﬁlm
formation and the role of bioﬁlms in the pathophysiology of
chronic wounds. Our major focus is on various formulation
strategies and delivery systems that are employed to eradicate
or disperse bioﬁlms, thereby effectively managing acute and
chronic wounds. We also discuss clinical research that has
studied or is studying the treatment of bioﬁlm-infected chronic
wounds.

Keywords: Bioﬁlms; Chronic wounds; Antibioﬁlm agents;
Antimicrobial resistance; Bacterial infections; Drug delivery systems;
Nanomaterials

Karan Razdan is a B.Pharm and M.
from Guru
Pharm gold medalist
Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, India.
He is pursuing his Ph.D. in Pharma-
ceutics from the University Institute
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Panjab
University,
India under the supervi-
sion of Dr. V.R. Sinha. Karan was
awarded the prestigious Common-
wealth split site (PhD) scholarship
(2019–2020) to study at the Univer-
sity of Central Lancashire, Preston, UK
under the guidance of Prof. Kamalinder K. Singh. His research
focuses on the development of nano-formulations containing anti-
bioﬁlm agents for the treatment of bioﬁlms in wound infections. He
has 2 research papers, 4 review articles and 2 book chapters to his
credit.

Jorge Garcia-Lara is Senior lecturer
in Microbiology and Director of MRes
in Medical Sciences at the School of
Medicine, University of Central Lan-
cashire, Preston. His expertise is in
the ﬁeld of infectious diseases, from
the molecular
intimate aspects of
and cellular biology of bacterial
pathogens to translation into novel
prophylactics and therapies. With
more than 40 publications and 6
patents, he is an internationally rec-
ognized ﬁgure in the ﬁeld, with extensive experience in academic
and industry research developed in prestigious universities and
research institutes in Europe and the USA.

Sciences,

V.R. Sinha is Professor of Pharma-
ceutics at the University Institute of
Pharmaceutical
Panjab
University,
India. He has more than
100 publications and one patent to
his credit. He was also awarded a
Cited
Thomson
Researcher award in 2014 in recog-
nition of his ranking among the top
1% of researchers in their speciﬁed
ﬁelds. His area of research includes
solid oral dosage forms, long-acting
parenterals, and topical and trans-
dermal drug delivery.

Reuters Highly

⇑ Corresponding authors at: School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Clinical and Biomedical Sciences, University of Central Lancashire, Preston PR1 2HE, UK (K.K. Singh)
Sinha, V.R.
and Pharmaceutics Division, University Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, UGC-Centre of Advanced Study, Panjab University, Chandigarh 160014, India (V.R. Sinha).
(vrsinha@pu.ac.in), Singh, K.K. (ksingh1@uclan.ac.uk).

1359-6446/(cid:1) 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2022.04.020This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

www.drugdiscoverytoday.com 2137

K
E
Y
N
O
T
E

(

G
R
E
E
N

)

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

of

School

Pharmacy

Kamalinder K. Singh is Professor of
Pharmaceutical technology and drug
delivery and School Research Lead at
and
the
Biomedical Sciences, University of
Central Lancashire, UK. She heads the
Nanomedicine research group and is
healthcare lead for the UCLan Centre
of Smart Materials. With more than
35 years of experience in academia,
Prof. Singh has contributed signiﬁ-
cantly to the ﬁelds of pharmaceutical
technology, drug delivery and nanomedicine, authoring more than
100 research articles, 18 patents, 12 book chapters and 60 mono-
graphs. Her pioneering research has led to the development of
many biocompatible nanoparticle-based platform technologies,
which are exploited to deliver drugs across various biological bar-
riers, with applications in human health and diseases.

Introduction
The serendipitous discovery of penicillin by Sir Alexander Flem-
ing in 19281 transformed medicine and spearheaded the era of
antibiotic discovery. The average life expectancy in the U.S.A
alone rose from 47 years to around 78 years.2 Nevertheless, bac-
teria have developed resistance to antimicrobials as a natural cop-
ing mechanism that enables their survival, and thus, the menace
of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) threatens to return human
beings to a time when infectious diseases could again become
the leading cause of mortality. The rise of AMR has been inﬂu-
enced by the overuse and misuse of antibiotics. It is estimated
that, by 2050, 10 million people may die from diseases caused
by AMR strains alone, with an accompanying economic burden
that could amount to US$100 trillion.3 The formation of bioﬁlms
by bacteria is a signiﬁcant contributor to the development of
AMR. According to the National Institutes of Health and the
Center for Disease and Prevention, it is estimated that 65–80%
of human infections are caused by bioﬁlms.4 A bioﬁlm is an orga-
nized community of microorganisms, most commonly bacteria,
attached to an abiotic or biotic surface. The community develops
embedded within an extracellular polymeric substance (EPS)
made of polysaccharides, proteins and DNAs that are secreted
by the microorganisms themselves. The EPS accounts for 90%
of the biomass of a bioﬁlm.5

Infections that result from bioﬁlm formation are a serious
threat to patients globally. Bioﬁlm formation mediates a diverse
range of diseases, such as cystic ﬁbrosis, wound infections, otitis
media, pneumonia, and osteomyelitis, that are formed on tissues
and implanted devices.6 Chronic wounds, such as diabetic foot
and pressure ulcers, are hotspots for bioﬁlm growth because
necrotic tissue and debris permit the attachment of bacteria. This
impairs the healing process and exacerbates the patient’s condi-
tion.7 The treatment of all bioﬁlm-dependent clinical presenta-
tions is particularly problematic because bacteria that are
encased within a bioﬁlm may be 1000-fold more resistant to
antibiotics than their planktonic counterparts.8

Various antibiotics, such as fusidic acid, mupirocin and silver
sulfadiazine, have been used to treat wound infections, but bio-
ﬁlm formation hampers their antibacterial activity.
In this
regard, antibioﬁlm agents can offer exceptional advantages as
they can be useful in disrupting the bioﬁlm matrix and in
enhancing the efﬁcacy of antibiotics. The formulation of efﬁ-
cient delivery systems that incorporate antibioﬁlm agents can

2138 www.drugdiscoverytoday.com

provide appropriate control of wound infections with better clin-
ical outcomes. Following a brief introduction to the processes of
wound healing and bioﬁlm formation and to the interplay
between them, this review focuses on antibioﬁlm agents, drug
delivery strategies, and clinical trials relating to the treatment
of bioﬁlm-infected chronic wounds.

Chronic wound pathophysiology
A wound is any break or damage in the surface of the skin. It can
range from a small cut to a large surgical or burn wound. Wound
healing is a process that commences naturally and immediately
in response to an injury. It is a well-coordinated and a complex
process that involves a cascade of physiological responses elicited
by various cell types.9 Acute wounds undergo uninterrupted
repair, whereas ‘chronic wounds’ fail to heal due to interference
in the orderly process that result from an infection or an under-
lying serious illness. The wound healing process is summarized
schematically in Fig. 1.

When a wound fails to heal in the normal timeframe due to
various factors such as vascular insufﬁciency, diabetes, ageing
or infection, it is said to have become chronic.10 Chronic wounds
are stuck in a vicious loop of hyperinﬂammation, evidenced by a
2–3-fold increase in the accumulation of neutrophils and macro-
phages and in the expression of tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-a), interleukin 1 beta (IL1-b) and other pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines.11 An excess of neutrophils stimulates the overproduc-
tion of reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to direct damage to
the extracellular matrix (ECM) and, eventually, to premature cell
death.12 Moreover, the release of proteases such as elastase and
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) such as neutrophil collage-
nase (MMP-8) by neutrophils is enhanced in response to pro-
longed inﬂammation signals.13 This results in the degradation
of ECM components and growth factors, and impairs the action
of antimicrobial peptides such as cathelicidins.13 The production
of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines such as IL-1b and TNF-a by neu-
trophils and activated macrophages also leads to a reduction in
the accumulation of tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMPs). This
exacerbates further degradation of the ECM and decreases ﬁbrob-
last proliferation and collagen synthesis. Such an exhaustive and
undesirable inﬂammatory response, combined with an impaired
host response, perpetuates a deleterious cycle that prevents the
healing of chronic wounds.

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

)

N
E
E
R
G

(

E
T
O
N
Y
E
K

FIG. 1
Schematic description of the sequence of events in acute and chronic wound healing. ECM, extracellular matrix; EGF, Epidermal growth factor; FGF,
Fibroblast growth factor; IL-1, Interleukin 1; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; PDGF, Platelet-derived growth factor; TGF-b, Transforming growth factor b; TNF-a,
Tumor necrosis factor a; VEGF, Vascular endothelial growth factor.

Drug Discovery Today

Vasculopathies such as venous hypertension, atherosclero-
sis or periwound ﬁbrosis lead to local tissue hypoxia, which
contributes to the perpetuation of chronic wounds. Enhanced
expression of endothelial adhesion molecules in hypoxic tis-
sue leads to extravasation of neutrophils and macrophages,
which further promotes the synthesis of pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines such as IL-1a, IL-1b, TNF-a. Moreover, the produc-
tion of nitric oxide (NO), an antioxidant, is reduced in the
hypoxic state, hindering the regulation of ROS formation.14
re-epithelialization and ﬁbroblast
Hypoxia
proliferation.

also impairs

Types of chronic wounds
Pressure (decubitus) ulcers
Patients who have lost sensory perception or who are immobile
(unconscious or paralyzed) cannot respond in a timely way to
the need for repositioning. Therefore, their skin tissue may be
susceptible to compression, particularly over bony prominences
such as the hips and sacrum.15 This may lead to tissue necrosis
as the result of localized ischemia and reperfusion, sustained cell
deformation, and impaired interstitial ﬂuid ﬂow and lymphatic
drainage.15 The skin breakdown is followed by bacterial coloniza-
tion, which further interferes with angiogenesis, the deposition
of ECM and other wound-healing processes, and chronic ulcers
persist.16.

Venous stasis ulcers
More than half of lower-limb chronic wounds are venous stasis
ulcers, which have higher prevalence in the elderly and in
women.17 These ulcers manifest secondary to venous hyperten-
sion as a result of venous thrombosis or damage in the valves
of leg veins.18 An increase in the venous backpressure causes
leakage of plasma macromolecules and ﬁbrin into the perivascu-
lar space. Fibrin accumulation impairs collagen synthesis and
disrupts the normal function of the vessel by forming peri-
capillary ﬁbrin cuffs.19 The ﬁbrosis and oedema retard the circu-
lation of oxygen and nutrients into the wound tissue, creating a
hypoxic environment. All of these events lead to skin breakdown
and eventually to chronic ulcers.

Arterial ulcers
Arterial ulcers occur due to hypoxic and ischemic damage to dis-
tal tissues that results from the narrowing of the arterial lumen
due to atherosclerosis and/or embolism.20 Major risk factors for
the peripheral occlusion of arteries in the legs include smoking,
hypertension, diabetes and hypercholesterolemia. Ulcers can
result from minor trauma to an affected area.

Diabetic foot ulcers
Diabetic ulcers are a grave complication of diabetes that result
from the pathogenic triad of ischemia, neuropathy and trauma.
Loss of sensation in the feet due to diabetes-associated peripheral

www.drugdiscoverytoday.com 2139

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

neuropathy, augmented by disrupted perfusion, enhances the
risk of ulceration from recurrent mechanical strain.21 Moreover,
the accumulation of advanced glycation end-products (AGEs)
due to metabolic disarray, induces oxidative stress and escalates
ECM stiffness.22 A chronic inﬂammatory state perpetuates,
which most often leads to limb amputations.

Mechanism of bacterial bioﬁlm formation
Within the complex architecture of bioﬁlms, bacteria are
shielded and develop adaptive responses to hostile environmen-
tal conditions that enable them to endure desiccation or starva-
tion, evade the host immune system, or develop increased
resistance to antibiotics.23 The bioﬁlm matrix that acts as a
cocoon for bacteria is composed of exopolysaccharides, proteins
and extracellular DNA (eDNA). The polysaccharide composition
varies across species, for instance, Pseudomonas aeruginosa pro-
duces three types of exopolysaccharides: alginate, Pel and Psl.
Alginate is responsible for providing mechanical stability to
mature bioﬁlms, whereas Pel and Psl take part in the early stages
of
Poly-N-
acetylglucosamine (PNAG) provides structural integrity to bio-
ﬁlms of Staphylococcus epidermidis.5

bioﬁlm formation by non-mucoid

strains.

K
E
Y
N
O
T
E

(

G
R
E
E
N

)

Cell-surface-associated

extracellular
carbohydrate-binding proteins (lectins) are a few of the many

proteins

and

proteins found among the EPS. The galactose-speciﬁc lectin LecA
and the fucose-speciﬁc lectin Lecb of P. aeruginosa, as well as
glucan-binding proteins of Streptococcus mutans, have been
linked to bioﬁlm formation.

Another signiﬁcant and integral component of the EPS is
eDNA, which serves various roles in bioﬁlm formation in differ-
ent bacterial species. eDNA serves as an intercellular connector
in P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms, whereas it provides structural integrity
to Staphylococcus aureus bioﬁlms. In Bacillus cereus bioﬁlms, eDNA
acts as an adhesion molecule.5 The signiﬁcance of eDNA for
structural stability is typically shown by the DNase-mediated dis-
integration of bioﬁlms.24

The formation of a bioﬁlm is a multistep dynamic process
comprising of four stages: (i) attachment of bacteria to a surface,
(ii) microcolony formation, (iii) bioﬁlm maturation, and (iv)
detachment or dispersal (Fig. 2).25

The initial attachment of bacteria consists of reversible and
irreversible stages. The free-ﬂoating planktonic bacteria loosely
adhere to the substratum through the weak van der Waals,
hydrophobic and/or electrostatic forces.26–27 Bacteria that utilize
ﬂagella to overcome the hydrodynamic and repulsive forces that
may act against attachment have a competitive advantage. Adhe-
sins secreted by bacteria, which are present at the tips of extracel-
lular appendages (pili, ﬂagella and ﬁmbriae), mediate adherence

FIG. 2
Stages of biofilm formation on the wound surface, and antibiofilm agents and strategies for biofilm inhibition and/or dispersal. C-di-GMP, cyclic
dimeric guanosine monophosphate; EPS, extracellular polymeric substance.

2140 www.drugdiscoverytoday.com

Drug Discovery Today

)

N
E
E
R
G

(

E
T
O
N
Y
E
K

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

to the surface.28 Once the attachment is secured, signals for a
change in gene expression are triggered, leading to the upregula-
tion of factors that are implicated in the formation of EPS. Bacte-
ria begin to produce EPS, which further strengthen their
attachment to each other and to the substratum. They start to
divide and form microcolonies in response to cell–cell communi-
cation. This cellular crosstalk is referred to as quorum sensing
(QS). The QS mechanism involves signaling molecules that bind
to response regulators and lead to the regulation of many genes,
including those encoding for bacterial virulence factors.29 QS
molecules are called autoinducers (AIs). Gram-negative bacteria
produce N-acyl-homoserine lactones (AHLs) as AIs, whereas
Gram-positive bacteria use autoinducing peptide (AIP), and both
bacteria also use AI-2-based signaling.30–31 With the inception of
colonization, the microcolonies further enlarge and enhance the
production of EPS.5 Further recruitment of microbial cells, along
with deposition of organic and inorganic solutes, results in the
bioﬁlm maturation.

After complete establishment of a bioﬁlm, detachment and
dispersal take place to allow the colonization of new niches by
the bacteria. The dispersal process, which can be active or pas-
sive, involves environmental signals, signal transduction path-
ways and effectors. Active dispersal is mediated by the bacteria
themselves, whereas passive dispersal is mediated by the external
forces such as ﬂuid shear.32 Bacteria produce matrix-degrading
enzymes, such as glycosidases and proteases, that support the
active dispersal of the bioﬁlm. One of the most-studied intracel-
lular signaling molecules is cyclic-diguanyl monophosphate (c-
di-GMP), reduced levels of which induce bioﬁlm dispersal.33
Daughter cells may detach individually or as clumps containing
thousands of bacteria due to the shearing of surrounding ﬂuids
or changes in the surface properties of substratum. The released
cells carry and retain the characteristics of the parent bioﬁlm
and reform on a new or existing substratum.34 In this way, the
process of new bioﬁlm formation begins, and the cycle
continues.

Bioﬁlms in chronic wounds
Many factors which can delay wound healing, but bioﬁlm forma-
tion is of utmost importance. In 2008, James et al.7 identiﬁed bio-
ﬁlms in clinical specimens from chronic and acute wounds using
both light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM).
Evidence of the presence of bioﬁlms in ulcerated burn wound
areas was found by Kennedy et al.35 in 2010 using electron and
light microscopy. In 2011, Neut et al.36 found dense aggregates
of bacterial colonies surrounded by EPS in patients with diabetic
ulcers. Chronic wounds provide an ideal habitat for bioﬁlm for-
mation. Bacteria can easily attach to wound debris and infect
the wound due to impaired host immune response.37 The pres-
ence of bioﬁlm affects the function of cutaneous-cellular and
immune cells. It acts as a physical barrier to neutrophil and
macrophage penetration and prevents the active killing of bacte-
ria. P. aeruginosa bacteria have been reported to lyse the neu-
trophils that come into close contact with them via QS system
factors.38 In addition, rhamnolipids that are produced by bacte-
ria have been reported to prevent the phagocytosis of bacteria
by neutrophils.39 Ciszek-Lenda et al.40 demonstrated that P.

aeruginosa (PAR5 strain) bioﬁlm contained high concentrations
of extracellular DNA and lipo-polysaccharide (LPS), and that
phagocytes (neutrophils and macrophages) that were exposed
to this microenvironment secreted inﬂammatory mediators such
as TNF-a, IL-6 and PGE2, thereby inducing a hyperinﬂammatory
state that caused tissue damage.

Wound repair depends on a ﬁne balance between the activi-
ties of proteases and their inhibitors. MMPs are zinc-dependent
proteases that digest ECM and mediate the inﬂux of reparative
ﬁbroblasts, called keratinocytes.41 TIMPs keep the level of MMPs
in check by downregulating the levels of proinﬂammatory cyto-
kines. In chronic wounds, however, this balanced regulatory sys-
tem goes awry and excessive cleavage of unintended targets, such
as growth factors and cytokines, ensues.42 This signiﬁcantly
hampers the repair process. The presence of bioﬁlm has been
shown to augment the production of MMP-1 and MMP-3 by ker-
atinocytes.43 Concentrations of MMP-1 and MMP-8 have been
demonstrated to be increased in chronic venous ulcers that are
infected with S. aureus and P. aeruginosa.44 Thermolysin protease
secreted by P. aeruginosa activates MMP-1, MMP-8 and MMP-9.45

Antibioﬁlm agents
Bioﬁlms at the wound sites can be addressed in two ways: either
by preventing their formation or by the disruption of already
established bioﬁlms. Bioﬁlm formation can be prevented by
modifying either the surface or the microbial cells themselves
to inhibit the attachment of bacteria. Pre-conditioning of the
surface with surfactants or conferring surface hydrophobicity
can help to inhibit the bioﬁlm formation.46–47 Pre-formed bio-
ﬁlms can be damaged by disruption of the bioﬁlm matrix and
its subsequent detachment. Bioﬁlms can be detached by three
approaches: sloughing, erosion or seeding dispersal.48 Sloughing
involves the removal of lumps of bioﬁlm from the surfaces by
stripping-off bioﬁlm mass, whereas erosion is the slow and con-
tinuous detachment of small portions of the bioﬁlm. Seeding dis-
persal is an active process in which single bacterial cells from the
central bioﬁlm region are discharged rapidly.48 Herein, we focus
on agents that destroy pre-formed bioﬁlms, with their targets
and modes of action listed in Table 1.

Delivery systems for antibioﬁlm agents to promote
wound healing
The main aim of wound treatment is to maintain a moist and
clean environment, to manage pain and to address comorbidities
that aggravate the wound. The systemic treatment of infection
faces complexities such as drug interactions, systemic adverse
effects, and insufﬁcient drug concentrations at the local wound
site. Moreover, the use of systemic antibiotics to treat certain
types of chronic wounds, such as diabetic ulcers or wounds that
involve the presence of a bioﬁlm, is not preferred because it is not
supported by adequate evidence.49–50 Topical delivery of antibi-
otics has been used extensively for wound infections. This deliv-
ery strategy provides higher local drug concentrations and avoids
the need for high-dose systemic exposure by reducing the
amount of antibiotic required to kill the bacteria.51 Nevertheless,
the presence of bioﬁlm in chronic wounds limits the effective-
ness of topical antibiotic treatment. The EPS in bioﬁlms act as

www.drugdiscoverytoday.com 2141

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

TABLE 1

Antibiofilm agents and their modes of action.

Antibioﬁlm agents

Mode of action

K
E
Y
N
O
T
E

(

G
R
E
E
N

)

Quorum sensing (QS)

inhibitors

Extracellular polymeric
substance (EPS)-
degrading enzymes

Surfactants

Fatty acids (FAs)

Metal chelators

Nitric oxide (NO)

Antimicrobial peptides

(AMPs)

QS signaling can be dampened by the quorum quenching (QQ) of
enzymes and molecules. QQ can be achieved by the degradation of
QS signals, which in turn would suppress QS-regulated phenotypes
such as virulence and bioﬁlm formation.
Dispersin B (DspB), a bacterial glycoside hydrolase produced by
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, cleaves poly-b 1,6-N-
acetylglucosamine (PNAG), a major polysaccharide of EPS that is
involved in the surface attachment, bioﬁlm establishment and
antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Deoxyribonuclease I (DNase I)
degrades eDNA present in the EPS and cell-surface-associated nucleic
acids that function as surface adhesins and that inhibit the initial
attachment of bacterial cells.
Rhamnolipids that are produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa have
been reported to induce the dispersal of bioﬁlm through the
formation of central hollow cavities.
FAs can control bioﬁlm formation by functioning as signal molecules.
For example, cis-11-methyl-2-dodecenoic acid, a diffusible signal
factor (DSF) produced by Xanthomonas campestris, is capable of
causing bioﬁlm dispersion by endoglucanase synthesis leading to EPS
degradation.
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) chelates Mg2+ and Ca2+ from
the outer cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria and destabilizes the
negative charge of lipopolysaccharides (LPS).
NO-generating agents, such as sodium nitroprusside (SNP), have been
shown to trigger bioﬁlm dispersal by shifting bacterial growth from
bioﬁlm mode to planktonic state. This shift is induced by a reduction
in the intracellular levels of cyclic dimeric guanosine monophosphate
(c-di-GMP).
These are small molecules (10–100 amino acids) produced by all living
beings that play an important role in innate immunity. AMPs
permeabilize microbial membranes mainly because of their cationic
nature, which affects the transmembrane potential, resulting in cell
death. AMPs can also downregulate QS systems, Las and Rhl.

Examples

Azithromycin, bergamottin, usnic
acid, quercetin, ellagic acid

References
80–83

Dispersin B, Deoxyribonuclease I

84–85

Poloxamer-188, Tween 20, sodium
dodecyl sulfate, rhamnolipids

Caprylic acid, palmitic acid,
myristoleic acid

EDTA

Sodium nitroprusside, S-nitroso-L-
glutathione, S-nitroso-N-acetyl
penicillamine

Nisin A, human cathelicidin LL-37,
human b-defensin 3, hepcidin 20

86–87

88–90

91–92

93–94

95–97

a physical barrier to antibiotics and immune cells. Furthermore,
the bacterial cells that reside within bioﬁlm are in a dormant
metabolic state and antibiotics are ineffective against them as
these agents only target metabolically active cells.7 Therefore,
the topical delivery of antibioﬁlm agents alone and/or in combi-
nation with antibiotics can be of great therapeutic value in the
treatment of chronic wound infections. The presence of antibio-
ﬁlm agents in the delivery system will disperse the bioﬁlm while
simultaneously allowing the antibiotics to target the previously
unexposed bacterial cells (Fig. 3). In this section, we highlight
various delivery systems containing different bioactive agents
for the treatment of chronic wound infections. The delivery sys-
tems are classiﬁed primarily into hydrogels, nanoﬁbers, ﬁlms,
and nanoscale materials.

Hydrogels
Hydrogels are a popular choice as wound dressings because of
their biocompatibility, ﬂexibility, and high-water content
(96%). Polymers such as polyvinyl alcohol, poloxamers, chi-
tosan, gelatin, and carbomers are commonly used to prepare
hydrogels.52 These hydrogels do not dissolve in water because
of the physical and chemical cross-linking that causes their
constituents to form a polymeric network.53 Hydrogels keep
the wound moist, absorb wound exudate and have a soothing

2142 www.drugdiscoverytoday.com

effect on painful chronic ulcers.54 Thus, hydrogels are suitable
for the delivery of antibiotics and antibioﬁlm agents for manag-
ing bioﬁlms in chronic wounds. The release of the bioactive
agents can be prolonged by modulating the polymeric compo-
sition of the hydrogel. This can achieve a sustained effect that
could reduce the frequency of dressing change and could regu-
late the exposure of the bacteria to sub-inhibitory concentra-
tions of antibiotics. Antibioﬁlm agents can be incorporated
directly into the hydrogel or can be delivered via incorporation
that are embedded into the
into other delivery systems
hydrogels.

Thapa et al.55 formulated a hybrid hydrogel called ‘GarKS gel’,
which was composed of Pluronic F127 (PF127) liposomes loaded
with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), glutathione (GSH),
and the bacteriocin Garvicin KS (GarKS). Bacteriocins are antimi-
crobial peptides (AMPs) that are synthesized by bacteria. The gel
was found to inhibit (cid:1) 82% of S. aureus bioﬁlm in vitro, as deter-
mined by crystal violet assay, in comparison to just (cid:1) 18% inhi-
bition by a blank gel. The S. aureus Xen-31 infected mouse
wound model was subsequently used for in vivo evaluation of
the hydrogel, with the antibacterial effects being assessed using
an IVIS Lumina II imaging system to measure the luminescence
of bacteria present in the wound site. A single treatment with the
GarKS gel showed an (cid:1) 12-fold reduction in bacterial lumines-

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

)

N
E
E
R
G

(

E
T
O
N
Y
E
K

FIG. 3
Antibiofilm agents and antibiotics, alone or incorporated within nanoparticles (NPs), are released from topical carriers such as nanofibers,
hydrogels or films. The initial interactions with the biofilm matrix can be electrostatic or hydrophobic. NPs have a large surface area because of their small
size, which faclitates their penetration into the biofilm matrix. The transport of the active agents including nanoscale materials can be affected by the
viscosity, flow and density of the extracellular polymeric substance (EPS). The antibiofilm agents disrupt the matrix structure and break the biofilm apart.
Once within the matrix, the NPs interact with bacterial cells and act upon various targets as determined by their composition.

Drug Discovery Today

cence at day 1 post-treatment when treated and untreated groups
were compared.55

Neff et al.56 assessed the activity of two synthetically engi-
neered cationic AMPs (ASP-1 and ASP-2) loaded in a chitosan
matrix against bioﬁlms of P. aeruginosa and methicillin-
resistant S. aureus (MRSA), which were grown on polyethylene
terepthalate (PET) mesh and porcine skin for 24 h and 72 h,
respectively. The ASP-1 gel eradicated P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm and
both AMP gels eradicated MRSA bioﬁlms from the PET mesh sub-
strate within one day. Both gels decreased MRSA counts in the
porcine skin by 4–7 log10 within the ﬁrst day of treatment, and
similar results were obtained over days 2 and 3 of treatment.
By comparison, the commercially available silver gel Opticell
Ag showed < 1 log10 reduction over a 3-day period. This can be
attributed to the sustained release of AMPs from the chitosan
matrix and the maintenance of AMP stability.56

Chhibber et al.57 prepared a novel topical gel containing the
antibiotic moxiﬂoxacin, as well as the antibioﬁlm agents chi-
tosan and EDTA, and evaluated its efﬁcacy in MRSA-infected

burn wounds in mice in comparison to a conventional gel con-
taining moxiﬂoxacin only. The novel gel caused a 3.5 log10
reduction in bacterial count at 24 h post-infection (compared
with a 2.8 log10 reduction for the conventional gel) and demon-
strated better wound-healing potential.57

Deoxyribonuclease-I (DNase-I) has been proven to be an efﬁ-
cacious antibioﬁlm agent as it hydrolyzes the extracellular DNA
found in bioﬁlms. Patel et al.58 prepared silver-sulfadiazine-
loaded solid lipid nanoparticles (SSD-SLNs) and incorporated
them into a DNase-I-containing chitosan gel. When compared
to pure SSD, this combined formulation had reduced ﬁbroblast
toxicity in human dermal ﬁbroblast (HDF) cell lines. When used
in combination with DNase-I, SSD-SLNs produced 96.8% inhibi-
tion of P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm, whereas a combination of SSD and
DNase-I produced 82.9% inhibition. Confocal microscopic anal-
ysis revealed a reduction in the thickness of the bioﬁlm treated
with the SSD-SLNs DNase formulation. The incorporation of
DNase in the SSD-SLN gel resulted in complete wound healing
after 21 days when tested on burn wounds in rats.58

www.drugdiscoverytoday.com 2143

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

K
E
Y
N
O
T
E

(

G
R
E
E
N

)

Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) have been reported to have anti-
bioﬁlm properties, but their success has been constrained by
their toxicity and susceptibility to aggregation in the wound
environment. To overcome these shortcomings, Haidari et al.59
developed a biocompatible hydrogel that was loaded with ultra-
small AgNPs that provided favorable controlled-release character-
istics. They evaluated this hydrogel using a S. aureus Xen-29
infected full-thickness mature bioﬁlm mouse wound model.
Xenogen IVIS bioluminescent live animal imaging was used to
image the infected wounds. The AgNPs were found to
be < 3 nm in size and the AgNP hydrogel showed sustained
release of silver ions for up to 24 h. The treatment of infected
wounds with the AgNP hydrogel resulted in quicker wound clo-
sure (46% vs. 20% for SSD) and accelerated wound re-
epithelization (60%) as determined by the histological analysis.
Furthermore, the AgNP hydrogel treatment signiﬁcantly reduced
the S. aureus bacterial load on day 10 ((cid:1)5 (cid:3) 106 photons/s for the
AgNP hydrogel in comparison to (cid:1) 2 (cid:3) 107 photons/s for SSD or
blank hydrogel treatment).59

In another excellent study, Wang et al.60 developed an inno-
vative pH-switchable supramolecular hydrogel system using an
amphipathic synthetic octapeptide (IKFQFHFD). The octapep-
tide formed a hydrogel at the neutral pH of 7.4 owing to inter-
molecular electrostatic interactions between the lysine (K) and
aspartate (D) residues at opposite ends of the octapeptide, and
p-p stacking conferred by the three phenylalanines (F). In a
wound environment, with an acidic pH of 5.5, the network
was destabilized by the protonation of aspartate. This led to an
antimicrobial effect as a result of the release of IKFQFHFD, which
has an AMP-like structure. The hydrogel was able to prevent the
formation of MRSA bioﬁlm, as conﬁrmed by crystal violet assay,
although it was unable to eradicate pre-formed MRSA bioﬁlm.
Complete eradication of pre-formed MRSA bioﬁlm was observed
when the hydrogel was loaded with cypate, a cyanine dye that
possesses photothermal properties when under near-infrared
irradiation. Irradiation of the hydrogel system loaded with
cypate and proline (hydrogel-Cy-Pro) eradicated the MRSA bio-
ﬁlm and resulted in complete healing of MRSA-bioﬁlm-infected
full-thickness wounds in diabetic mice within 20 days, as demon-
strated by the Gram-staining of the wound tissues and a reduc-
tion in the TNF-a expression. Complete re-epithelialization and
enhanced collagen deposition was observed in the infected
wounds treated with hydrogel-Cy-Pro, thus showing the poten-
tial of this treatment as a future therapy for MRSA-bioﬁlm-
infected chronic wounds.60

Waite et al.61 evaluated the antibioﬁlm activity of an
advanced device (NOx) for chronic wound treatment. This
device comprised a primary mesh layer and secondary hydrogel
layer that were capable of generating 3 mmol/cm2 of nitric oxide
when placed in contact with each other for a period of 48 h. The
NOx dressing was able to prevent the formation of P. aeruginosa
and S. aureus bioﬁlms on nitrocellulose ﬁlters, with bioﬁlm cell
densities reduced signiﬁcantly from 4 (cid:3) 108 CFU/ﬁlter for the
placebo dressing to 50 CFU/ﬁlter for the NOx dressing. The
NOx dressing was also able to disrupt pre-formed bioﬁlms and
reduced the bacterial population to levels that were not detect-
able. When compared to untreated and placebo-treated polymi-
crobial bioﬁlms, NOx also reduced both MRSA and P.

2144 www.drugdiscoverytoday.com

aeruginosa populations by 5.3 log10 and 4.1 log10, respectively,
at 24 h post-inoculation. In the same comparison, the pyocyanin
and elastase activities of P. aeruginosa PA5 were also reduced 1.9-
and 3.2-fold, respectively. The clinical signiﬁcance of the reduc-
tion in these virulence factors could have signiﬁcant therapeutic
implications for wound healing because these factors promote
tissue damage.61

Richter et al.62 prepared chitosan-dextran hydrogels contain-
ing deferiprone (Def) (an iron chelator) and the heme analog
gallium-protoporphyrin (GaPP), either alone or in combination
with the antibiotic ciproﬂoxacin (Cip), and evaluated their activ-
ity against bioﬁlms of S. aureus, P. aeruginosa and a clinical MRSA
isolate grown on an artiﬁcial wound model. The artiﬁcial wounds
were composed of hyaluronic acid (HA), collagen, bovine
plasma, Bolton broth and horse blood. Reductions of up to 0.5
log10 and 0.2 log10 were observed with the Def gel and the GaPP
gel, respectively, at a concentration of 500 mg/ml. When com-
pared to a blank gel, a gel containing a combination of Def, GaPP
and Cip showed signiﬁcant antibioﬁlm activity, with a 0.7 log10
reduction in both S. aureus and MRSA bioﬁlms, as well as a 1.9
log10 reduction in a P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm. Thus, a combination
therapy involving an antibioﬁlm agent with an antibiotic holds
promise for future therapies against chronic wounds.62

Mupirocin is a topical antibiotic that is active against Gram-
positive bacteria, including MRSA. Hurler et al.63 prepared liposo-
mal mupirocin, which has been reported to possess antibioﬁlm
activity against S. aureus, and enhanced the penetration of the
drug through the bacterial bioﬁlm. The liposomal formulation
was further incorporated into a chitosan hydrogel, which func-
tioned as a vehicle and also to provide additional wound-
healing effect. The liposomal mupirocin was not toxic to HaCaT
cells at the highest investigated concentration of 100 mg/ml, and
it was able to prevent the formation of bioﬁlm by S. aureus as
determined by resazurin and crystal violet assay. Nevertheless,
liposomal mupirocin was only able to cause a 50% reduction in
viability when applied 18 h post bioﬁlm establishment at a con-
centration of 405 mM. The liposomal mupirocin hydrogel
showed faster healing in comparison to a marketed formulation
(Bactroban), albeit with similar efﬁcacy. This study shows that
chitosan hydrogel embedded with liposomal mupirocin is effec-
tive in preventing the formation of bioﬁlms and in enhancing
the wound healing process.63

Nanoﬁbers
Nanoﬁbers are nanometer-scale ﬁbers that are prepared using
various techniques, such as self-assembly, solution blowing and
electrospinning.64 They show promise in wound healing due to
their enhanced cell attachment, which is related to their high
surface-to-volume ratio and high porosity. Nanoﬁber scaffolds
also aid in cell proliferation as they mimic the structure of the
ECM and promote re-epithelialization and wound closure. More-
over, the porous nature of nanoﬁbers allows them to adsorb the
wound exudate and provide exchange of the nutrients.65 They
also have the beneﬁt of improved drug loading. A wide range
of biodegradable polymers, such as chitosan, polycaprolactone,
poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid), polyvinyl alcohol, cellulose and
non-biodegradable polymers such as poly(acrylates), have been
used to synthesize nanoﬁbers.

)

N
E
E
R
G

(

E
T
O
N
Y
E
K

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

Su et al.66 fabricated Pluronic F127-polycaprolactone (PCL)
core–shell nanoﬁbers encapsulating engineered human catheli-
cidin peptide 17BIPHE2. As this peptide is water soluble, co-
axial spinning was used to encapsulate it within the core. The
core–shell structure allowed the peptide to retain its biological
activity when present in the wound environment. The ﬁbers pro-
vided an initial burst and subsequent sustained release of the
peptide over a period of 28 days. When full-thickness excision
wounds infected with MRSA in type 2 diabetic mice were treated
on a daily basis with peptide-loaded ﬁber dressings for a period of
7 days, there was a 5.01 log10 reduction in bacterial count with-
out debridement as compared to placebo dressings. With
debridement prior to administration of the dressing, no colonies
were detected in the wounds (10.24 log10 reduction). Similarly,
mice infected with P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms showed a 3.61 log10
reduction in bacterial count as compared to placebo dressing
after daily treatment for a period of 3 days without debridement.
With debridement prior to administration of the dressing, no
colonies were detected in wounds (10.75 log10 reduction). More-
over, the level of inﬂammation was substantially reduced, as evi-
denced by the wound tissue histology. This
study thus
demonstrated the antibioﬁlm efﬁcacy and wound-healing poten-
tial of nanoﬁber dressings loaded with an AMP.66

An electrospun zein–PCL triple layered (3L) ﬁbrous dressing
encapsulating tetracycline (Tet) was developed by Alhusein
et al.67 These authors evaluated the dressing against preformed
bioﬁlms of MRSA in vitro and ex vivo using a pig skin model.
The triple layer was developed to reduce the burst release
observed with single layer matrices. The outer layers act as a dif-
fusion barrier to prolong the drug release. The zein–PCL blend
aided in conferring stability to the ﬁbres, as zein ﬁbres on their
own lost ﬁbre structure upon coming in contact with the buffer
medium. The zein–PCL 3L nanoﬁbres had released 50% of their
encapsulated Tet after 24 h and were able to release up to 60% of
the Tet after 15 days. The 3L matrix was able to reduce the bio-
mass of the MRSA bioﬁlm in vitro by 90% after 24 h of incuba-
tion, as determined using a crystal violet assay. When treated
with zein–PCL 3L nanoﬁbres for 24 h, pig skin harboring an
MRSA bioﬁlm that had been grown for over 5 days demonstrated
reduction from 100% (untreated sample) to 19 % of CFU/skin
sample. These nanoﬁbres were also found to be non-toxic to
FEK4 ﬁbroblast cells.

Films
Films are commonly used as dressings for low exudative and
postoperative wounds. They are made semi-permeable so as to
allow ventilation of the wound. Gaseous exchange across ﬁlms
is measured in terms of moisture vapor transmission rate
(MVTR). This exchange avoids the accumulation of moisture
under the dressing and prevents tissue maceration at wound
sites. Most ﬁlms are designed to have a high MVTR. Films have
the advantages of being transparent and conforming to the con-
tours of ﬂexible body parts such as knees and elbows due to their
elasticity. Nevertheless, they are only well suited for shallow
wounds as they are too thin to be applied to the deep wounds.68
Choi et al.69 evaluated the antibioﬁlm and wound-healing
efﬁcacy of a nitric oxide (NO)-releasing chitosan ﬁlm (CS–NO
ﬁlm) in MRSA bioﬁlm-infected full-thickness wounds in diabetic

mice. The CS–NO ﬁlm demonstrated 3-fold higher antibioﬁlm
activity in vitro in comparison to control and chitosan ﬁlms. Fur-
thermore, the CS–NO ﬁlm produced faster dispersal of bioﬁlm (at
day 12 post-injury) in vivo as compared to control (bioﬁlm
growth visible on day 15 post-injury) and CS ﬁlm-treated groups
(at day 15 post-injury). The percentage of initial wound area
remaining at day 15 post-injury was 5.8% and 40.6% for CS–
NO ﬁlm and CS ﬁlm, respectively. This indicates the importance
of bioﬁlm dispersal in escalating the wound-healing process.69

In another study, Yang et al.70 formulated a benzalkonium
chloride (BZL)-loaded novel nanoscale liquid ﬁlm-forming sys-
tem (LFFS) using polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and chitosan (CS). A
LFFS formulated using 5% PVA and 1% CS loaded with 5 mg/
ml of BZL was able to decrease the minimal inhibitory concentra-
tion (MIC) from 5 mg/ml to 1.43 mg/ml. The viable bacteria were
reduced by 81%, as compared to 60% by BZL solution, on day 7
of treatment of full-thickness wounds in mice infected with
MRSA. Complete wound healing was observed with LFFS on
day 14. Moreover, LFFS–BZL treatment markedly damaged the
MRSA bioﬁlm, whereas BZL treatment mildly affected the bioﬁlm
structure, as determined by crystal violet assay, electron micro-
scopy and confocal microscopy analysis. After treatment with
LFFS, 45.33% of live bacteria were found within bioﬁlm, in com-
parison to 85.82% after BZL treatment, when observed under a
confocal microscope using the LIVE/DEAD Baclight kit.70

Nanoscale materials
Owing to their size (1–100 nm), nanoscale materials (NMs) can
penetrate and deliver antibioﬁlm agents
into tissues and
bioﬁlms.71 Moreover, NMs that bear a positive charge can inter-
act more efﬁciently with negatively charged bacterial cells. They
can be synthesized from wide array of materials such as poly-
mers, metals and metal oxides. NMs can include inorganic
nanocomposites, dendrimers, silica nanoparticles, and polymeric
micelles. Silver (Ag)-based NMs possess inherent antibacterial
properties. NMs can induce DNA damage and membrane disrup-
tion through the production of ROS. Metabolic pathways have
been reported to be disrupted by interactions between NMs
and the thiol groups of proteins.72

Metal oxides
Ghaseminezhad et al.73 fabricated Ag–Fe3O4 nanocomposites
(NCs) that can penetrate and eradicate bioﬁlms upon application
of a magnetic ﬁeld. Ag–Fe3O4 NCs were synthesized using starch
as a stabilizer and a linker between Ag and Fe3O4 NPs that
enhances their antibacterial properties and reduces their cytotox-
icity. The NCs had a particle size of < 20 nm. As analyzed under a
confocal microscope by Live/Dead staining, Ag–Fe3O4 NCs erad-
icated > 90% of bioﬁlm bacteria in vitro when a magnetic ﬁeld
was applied. Upon application of a magnetic ﬁeld, NCs were also
able to kill S. aureus bacteria and eradicate a S. aureus bioﬁlm
grown within collagen matrix containing calf serum, which
mimicked the chronic wound bed. The magnetic ﬁeld allows
the penetration of NCs within the collagen and bioﬁlm matrix,
thus enhancing their efﬁcacy. Ag–Fe3O4 NCs were found to be
less cytotoxic to human ﬁbroblast cells than Ag-NPs, and thus
demonstrate better safety.73

www.drugdiscoverytoday.com 2145

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

Dendrimers

K
E
Y
N
O
T
E

(

G
R
E
E
N

)

Dendrimers are synthetic molecules that have a highly branched
and star-shaped structure. They have a narrow size distribution
and antimicrobial peptides can be used to prepare dendrimers.
Dendrimerization of AMPs enhances their activity by protecting
the AMPs against proteases and providing a high local concentra-
tion of bioactive units. Grassi et al.74 evaluated a dendrimeric
derivative of
the semi-synthetic antimicrobial peptide lin-
SB056-1 [(lin-SB056-1)2-K] against bioﬁlms of P. aeruginosa
PAO1 and of two clinical burn wound isolates (2091 and
2549). This evaluation was performed using an in vitro wound
model composed of a dermis-like scaffold embedded with blood
components at physiological levels. Dendrimerization of the
AMP maintained its activity at a high physiological salt concen-
tration, which would otherwise be a limiting factor for the AMP
activity. The scaffold was composed of two layers: the upper layer
consisting of high-molecular-weight (HWA) HA and the lower
layer made up of HMW HA, low-molecular-weight (LMW) HA
and collagen. The dendrimeric derivative exhibited remarkable
antibioﬁlm activity against both P. aeruginosa PAO1 and 2091
strains at a concentration of 19.25 mM, decreasing the number
of viable bacteria by up to 1 log-unit after 16 h of incubation.74
Graphene oxide

Graphene-based nanomaterials have limited water solubility and
are usually applied as contact-killing coatings on surfaces. Di
Giulio et al.75 evaluated the antibioﬁlm effect of graphene oxide
(GO) dispersion on bioﬁlms formed by clinical isolates of S. aur-
eus and P. aeruginosa obtained from the wounds of patients suf-
fering from chronic venous leg ulcers. A signiﬁcant reduction

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

in biomass was observed in viable counts for S. aureus, which
decreased from 8.63 to 6.89 log10 CFU/ml. The bioﬁlms became
detached from the walls of the plate, illustrating the penetrative
capacity of GO.75
Nanoscale emulsions
‘Nanoscale emulsion’ (NE) is an umbrella term for emulsions that
have globule size in the nanometer range, which include both
micro- and nano-emulsions. Microemulsions have been reported
to possess antibioﬁlm activity even without the incorporation of
other antibioﬁlm agents. Razdan et al.76 developed a levoﬂoxacin
(LFX)-incorporated clove oil nanoscale emulsion (LFX-NE) and
demonstrated its in vitro antibioﬁlm activity against P. aeruginosa
bioﬁlm. Clove oil was selected for its antibioﬁlm activity and as
the oil phase of the NE. The particle size of the LFX-NE was found
to be 18.84 ± 0.5 nm. It showed high antibacterial activity, and
ﬁeld emission scanning electron microscopy and confocal micro-
scopy revealed the destruction of a pre-formed mature bioﬁlm of
P. aeruginosa by LFX-NE at its MIC and minimum bactericidal
concentration (MBC).76

Clinical studies
Clinical studies of two of the patented antimicrobial dressings
developed by ConvaTec Ltd. UK, which are based on
HydroﬁberTM technology, have shown very high efﬁcacy in
bioﬁlm-harboring chronic wounds.77 The efﬁcacy of the AQUA-
CEL Ag + dressing was evaluated for bioﬁlm eradication and
wound healing in patients across the UK and Ireland. AQUACEL
Ag + is used to manage the exudate and employs ionic silver and
antibioﬁlm agents to control the infection and bioﬁlm. The

TABLE 2

Clinical trials of antibiofilm agents for the management of chronic wounds.

ClinicalTrials.gov
identiﬁer

Status

Year

Study details

NCT02228122

Completed

2014

The main aim of this pilot study was to assess the effect of the Aquacel Ag + Extra
dressing on bioﬁlms in chronic wounds for a period of 4 weeks in comparison to a non-
treatment group.

NCT04079998

Completed

NCT03686904

Active, not
recruiting

NCT03248154

Withdrawn (did not
receive funding)

NCT03461783

Completed

2019

2146 www.drugdiscoverytoday.com

2020 A parallel, randomized, controlled clinical study aimed at evaluating the antibioﬁlm

efﬁcacy of the FDA-approved wound dressing Procellera(cid:3) in comparison to the
standard treatment for acute trauma and burn wounds. The dressing contains a silver-
zinc electro-couple that generates a weak electrical ﬁeld upon being activated by a
moist wound environment. The efﬁcacy is assessed by determining the bacterial load
(colony forming units (CFU)) and by visualization of the bioﬁlm using scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) of tissue biopsies taken after a week of treatment.

2018 A parallel, randomized, controlled clinical study designed to examine the effect of

benzalkonium irrigation solution and benzalkonium gel (BlastXTM) on bioﬁlms in
chronic wounds, in comparison to saline irrigation and standard hydrocolloid gel
following debridement. The study will be carried out for 12 weeks with at least four
follow-up visits, and wounds will be assessed for size and signs of infection (by
measurement of CFUs).

2022 A parallel, open label, randomized, controlled clinical study that will determine the

implications of bioﬁlm infections in burn wounds. A total of 300 subjects will be
enrolled and divided into three age groups: 2–18 years old, 18–49 years old
and (cid:4) 50 years. There will be three arms, and subjects in arm 2 will receive standard
dressing or Procellera(cid:3). At days 0, 3, 7, 14, 21 and 28, burn wound size, blood cytokine
levels and laser doppler imaging determination will be carried out on tissue biopsies.
This parallel, open label, randomized, controlled clinical study aimed to assess the
effect of the Zorﬂex(cid:3) activated carbon cloth dressing on bioﬁlms in wounds of the
lower extremities and feet. The dressing conforms to the contours of the wound and
provides an antimicrobial effect for a minimum of 7 days per dressing. (Results not yet
available.)

Reference

98

99

100

101

102

)

N
E
E
R
G

(

E
T
O
N
Y
E
K

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

HydroﬁberTM dressing consists of two layers of sodium car-
boxymethylcellulose strengthened by regenerated cellulose ﬁber.
The Hydroﬁber transforms into a gel upon coming into contact
with the wound ﬂuid. The dressing incorporates a metal-
chelating component (EDTA) and a surfactant component (ben-
zethonium chloride) as antibioﬁlm agents, allowing ionic silver
to access bacteria that are embedded within the bioﬁlm matrix.78
The study involved a total of 29 patients (19 males and 9
females) selected from eight healthcare facilities across the UK
and Ireland, who were suffering from chronic wounds such as
leg ulcers and diabetic foot ulcers. The clinicians were advised
to replace the primary dressing with AQUACEL Ag + dressings
for up to 4 weeks. At baseline, seven wounds (24%) were found
to be deteriorating and 21 wounds (72%) were stagnant. After a
median period of 4.5 weeks, the wound status changed from
deteriorating/stagnant to improved, and the tissue type of the
wound bed improved to mainly granulation tissue (53%) from
previously bioﬁlm/sloughy tissue (76%). Out of 29 wounds, 26
reduced in size or healed completely. Hence, the AQUACEL
Ag + dressing was found to be highly effective because of the
absorption of wound exudate and the subsequent immobiliza-
tion of bacteria by the gelling of sodium carboxymethylcellulose,
coupled with a reduction in wound bioburden caused by ionic
silver. Moreover, disruption of bioﬁlm, due to the detergent-
like action of benzethonium chloride and metal chelation by
EDTA, signiﬁcantly enhanced the effectiveness of the dressing.
In another study by Metcalf and Bowler,79 the AQUACEL
Ag + ExtraTM dressing was evaluated in 65 patients suffering from
chronic wounds that were previously managed unsuccessfully
using conventional silver- or iodine-containing dressings. This
dressing is 9 times stronger and has 50% more absorbing capacity
than the AQUACEL Ag + dressing. The wounds ranged in dura-
tion from 1 week to 20 years, with median wound duration of
12 months. Of the 65 chronic wounds, 47 (72%) were stagnant
and 15 (23%) were deteriorating at baseline. Bioﬁlm was associ-
ated with 57% (n = 37) of the chronic wounds. The clinicians
were advised to replace the primary dressing with the AQUACEL
Ag + ExtraTM dressing. After an average of 4.2 weeks, 11 wounds
(17%) healed completely, 40 wounds (62%) improved, while 9
wounds (14%) remained as they were and 5 wounds (8%) deteri-
orated.79 These studies demonstrate that chronic wounds that
harbor bioﬁlms can be managed successfully with the proper
use of appropriate novel dressings that are designed to deliver
antibioﬁlm and antimicrobial agents in combination. Other clin-
ical studies related to the treatment of bioﬁlms related chronic
wounds that are either completed or still underway or recruiting
are summarized in Table 2.

Concluding remarks
It has been a little over a decade since bioﬁlms were found to be
present in the clinical wound specimens. Since then, extensive

References

1. Fleming A. On the antibacterial action of cultures of a penicillium, with special
J Exp Pathol

inﬂuenzae. Br

reference to their use in the isolation of B.
1929;10:226.

research has been undertaken to reveal the mechanism of bioﬁlm
formation and to ﬁnd treatment strategies for bioﬁlm-infected
wounds. Bioﬁlms are particularly important in the context of
public health, as conventional antibiotics and treatment strate-
gies are unable to treat such infections. This contributes to the
burden on patients, both ﬁnancially and emotionally. The treat-
ment of chronic wounds constitutes a major part of healthcare
budgets, and bioﬁlms are a major obstacle in the progression of
non-healing wounds. In addition to debridement, the current
approach for treating chronic wounds involves the systemic or
topical administration of antibiotics for long periods. Therefore,
it is imperative that effective ways are found to ﬁght bioﬁlms and
to promote wound healing. Various studies have explored versa-
tile antibioﬁlm agents, ranging from the simple sugar xylitol to
complex natural compounds. Some of these, such as such as xyl-
itol, EDTA and Dispersin B, have been found to be highly
effective.

Antibioﬁlm agents have been reported to be very efﬁcacious
when used in conjunction with antibiotics. Even the best of
molecule is ineffective, without a proper delivery system. Various
pharmaceutical drug delivery strategies have been developed to
treat bioﬁlm-infected non-healing wounds. These delivery sys-
tems have therapeutic potential to provide a platform for altering
the wound care paradigm in the near future. A range of delivery
systems, including hydrogels, nanoﬁbers and ﬁlms, have shown
a lot of promise in co-delivering the antibiotic along with an
antibioﬁlm agent. Owing to their prolonged contact and sus-
tained delivery of the drugs, these systems also aid in promoting
wound healing by alleviating the impaired host
immune
response as the bioﬁlm infection starts to get cleared. Some
recent clinical trials have shown better management of chronic
wounds with these novel dressings. Furthermore, nanoparticle-
based systems have shown an enhanced ability to penetrate
the bioﬁlms and to eradicate them effectively. Bioactive-loaded
nanoparticles that are embedded in hydrogels or nanoﬁbers hold
promise as future therapies. Further research and clinical trials
should be carried out in this area of unmet clinical need, which
continues to pose a signiﬁcant challenge to healthcare systems.
Continually emerging novel wound dressing technologies, com-
bined with nanomaterial-based drug delivery systems, have the
potential to improve treatment outcomes in patients who have
bioﬁlm-infected chronic wounds.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.

Acknowledgements

One of the authors, Karan Razdan, acknowledges the ﬁnancial
assistance provided by the Department of Science and Technol-
ogy, New Delhi, India (DST INSPIRE JRF (IF170172). Authors
are grateful to the Commonwealth Scholarship Commission,
UK (INCN-2019-380) for their ﬁnancial support.

2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National Centre for Health
Statistics. Life Expectancy. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/life-expectancy.
htm. Accessed February 5, 2022.

www.drugdiscoverytoday.com 2147

K
E
Y
N
O
T
E

(

G
R
E
E
N

)

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

3. O’Neill J. Review on antimicrobial resistance, tackling drug-resistant infections
globally: ﬁnal report and recommendations. London: Wellcome Trust and UK
Government. https://wellcomecollection.org/works/thvwsuba/items. Published
May, 2016. Accessed January 27, 2022.

4. D. Sharma, L. Misba, A. Khan, Antibiotics versus bioﬁlm: an emerging
battleground in microbial communities, Antimicrob Resist Infect Control 8
(2019) 76, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13756-019-0533-3.

5. H.C. Flemming, J. Wingender, The bioﬁlm matrix, Nat Rev Microbiol 8 (2010)

623–633, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro2415.

6. M.R. Parsek, P.K. Singh, Bacterial bioﬁlms: an emerging link to disease
pathogenesis, Annu Rev Microbiol 57 (2003) 677–701, https://doi.org/
10.1146/annurev.micro.57.030502.090720.

30. S.P. Diggle, K. Winzer, A. Lazdunski, P. Williams, M. Cámara, Advancing the
quorum in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: MvaT and the regulation of N-
acylhomoserine lactone production and virulence gene expression, J Bacteriol
184 (2002) 2576–2586.

31. M. Kleerebezem, L.E. Quadri, O.P. Kuipers, W.M. de Vos, Quorum sensing by
peptide pheromones and two-component signal-transduction systems in Gram-
positive bacteria, Mol Microbiol 24 (1997) 895–904, https://doi.org/10.1046/
j.1365-2958.1997.4251782.x.

32. C. Solano, M. Echeverz, I. Lasa, Bioﬁlm dispersion and quorum sensing, Curr
Opin Microbiol 18 (2014) 96–104, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2014.02.008.
33. J.B. Kaplan, Bioﬁlm dispersal: mechanisms, clinical implications, and potential

therapeutic uses, J Dent Res 89 (2010) 205–218.

7. G.A. James, E. Swogger, R. Wolcott, E.L. Pulcini, P. Secor, J. Sestrich, et al.,
Bioﬁlms in chronic wounds, Wound Repair Regen 16 (2008) 37–44, https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1524-475X.2007.00321.x.

34. T. Romeo, When the party is over: a signal for dispersal of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa bioﬁlms, J Bacteriol 188 (2006) 7325–7327, https://doi.org/10.1128/
JB.01317-06.

8. S.L. Percival, K.E. Hill, S. Malic, D.W. Thomas, D.W. Williams, Antimicrobial
tolerance and the signiﬁcance of persister cells in recalcitrant chronic wound
bioﬁlms, Wound Repair Regen 19 (2011) 1–9, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1524-
475X.2010.00651.x.

9. T. Velnar, T. Bailey, V. Smrkolj, The wound healing process: an overview of the

cellular and molecular mechanisms, J Int Med Res 37 (2009) 1528–1542.
10. R. Nunan, K.G. Harding, P. Martin, Clinical challenges of chronic wounds:
searching for an optimal animal model to recapitulate their complexity, Dis
Models Mech 7 (2014) 1205–1213.

11. S.A. Eming, T. Krieg, J.M. Davidson, Inﬂammation in wound repair: molecular

and cellular mechanisms, J Invest Dermatol 127 (2007) 514–525.

12. T.N. Demidova-Rice, M.R. Hamblin, I.M. Herman, Acute and impaired wound
healing: pathophysiology and current methods for drug delivery, part 1: normal
and chronic wounds: biology, causes, and approaches to care, Adv Skin Wound
Care 25 (2012) 304–314.

13. T.A. Wilgus, S. Roy, J.C. McDaniel, Neutrophils and wound repair: positive

actions and negative reactions, Adv Wound Care 2 (2013) 379–388.

14. A. Soneja, M. Drews, T. Malinski, Role of nitric oxide, nitroxidative and

oxidative stress in wound healing, Pharmacol Rep 57 (2005) 108–119.

15. C. Bansal, R. Scott, D. Stewart, C.J. Cockerell, Decubitus ulcers: a review of the

literature, Int J Dermatol 44 (2005) 805–810.

16. F. Liao, S. Burns, Y.K. Jan, Skin blood ﬂow dynamics and its role in pressure

ulcers, J Tissue Viability 22 (2013) 25–26.

17. M.A. Fonder, G.S. Lazarus, D.A. Cowan, B. Aronson-Cook, A.R. Kohli, A.J.
Mamelak, Treating the chronic wound: a practical approach to the care of
nonhealing wounds and wound care dressings, J Am Acad Dermatol 58 (2008)
185–206, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2007.08.048.

18. M. Wlaschek, K. Scharffetter-Kochanek, Oxidative stress in chronic venous leg

ulcers, Wound Repair Regen 13 (2005) 452–461.

19. J.T. Trent, A. Falabella, W.H. Eaglstein, R.S. Kirsner, Venous ulcers: pathophys-

iology and treatment options, Ostomy Wound Manag 51 (2005) 38–54.

20. P.A. Bonham, Assessment and management of patients with venous, arterial,
and diabetic/neuropathic lower extremity wounds, AACN Clin Issues 14 (2003)
442–456.

21. R. Gary Sibbald, K.Y. Woo, The biology of chronic foot ulcers in persons with

diabetes, Diabetes Metab Res Rev 24 (2008) S25–S30.

22. M. Peppa, P. Stavroulakis, S.A. Raptis, Advanced glycoxidation products and
impaired diabetic wound healing, Wound Repair Regen 17 (2009) 461–472.
23. J.W. Costerton, A short history of the development of the bioﬁlm concept, in:
M. Ghannoum, G. O’Toole (Eds.), Microbial bioﬁlms, ASM Press, Washington,
DC, 2004, pp. 4–19.

24. C.B. Whitchurch, T. Tolker-Nielsen, P.C. Ragas, J.S. Mattick, Extracellular DNA

required for bacterial bioﬁlm formation, Science 295 (2002) 1487.

25. M. Kostakioti, M. Hadjifrangiskou,

development, dispersal, and therapeutic strategies in the dawn of
postantibiotic era, Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 3 (2013) a010306.

S.J. Hultgren, Bacterial bioﬁlms:
the

26. R. Briandet, J.M. Herry, M.N. Bellon-Fontaine, Determination of the van der
Waals, electron donor and electron acceptor surface tension components of
static Gram-positive microbial bioﬁlms, Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 21 (2001)
299–310, https://doi.org/10.1016/s0927-7765(00)00213-7.

27. H. Takahashi, T. Suda, Y. Tanaka, B. Kimura, Cellular hydrophobicity of Listeria
monocytogenes involves initial attachment and bioﬁlm formation on the
surface of polyvinyl chloride, Lett Appl Microbiol 50 (2010) 618–625.

28. O.E. Petrova, K. Sauer, Sticky situations: key components that control bacterial

surface attachment, J Bacteriol 194 (2012) 2413–2425.

29. W.C. Fuqua, S.C. Winans, E.P. Greenberg, Quorum sensing in bacteria: the
J
family of cell density-responsive transcriptional

regulators,

LuxR-LuxI
Bacteriol 176 (1994) 269–275.

2148 www.drugdiscoverytoday.com

35. P. Kennedy, S. Brammah, E. Wills, Burns, bioﬁlm and a new appraisal of burn
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
(2010)

49–56,

sepsis,

Burns

36

wound
burns.2009.02.017.

36. D. Neut, E.J. Tijdens-Creusen, S.K. Bulstra, H.C. van der Mei, H.J. Busscher,
Bioﬁlms in chronic diabetic foot ulcers-a study of 2 cases, Acta Orthop 82 (2011)
383–385, https://doi.org/10.3109/17453674.2011.581265.

37. R.D. Wolcott, D.D. Rhoads, S.E. Dowd, Bioﬁlms and chronic wound

inﬂammation, J Wound Care 17 (2008) 333–341.

38. P. Martin, S.J. Leibovich, Inﬂammatory cells during wound repair: the good, the
bad and the ugly, Trends Cell Biol 15 (2005) 599–607, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tcb.2005.09.002.

39. A.K. Seth, M.R. Geringer, A.N. Gurjala, J.A. Abercrombie, P. Chen, T. You, et al.,
Understanding the host inﬂammatory response to wound infection: an in vivo
study of Klebsiella pneumoniae in a rabbit ear wound model, Wound Repair
Regen 20 (2012) 214–225.

40. M. Ciszek-Lenda, M. Strus, M. Walczewska, G. Majka, A. Machul-

_
Zwirbla, D.
Mikołajczyk, et al., Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm is a potent inducer of
phagocyte hyperinﬂammation, Inﬂamm Res 68 (2019) 397–413, https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00011-019-01227-x.

41. N.J. Trengove, M.C. Stacey, S. Macauley, N. Bennett, J. Gibson, F. Burslem, et al.,
Analysis of the acute and chronic wound environments: the role of proteases
and their inhibitors, Wound Repair Regen 7 (1999) 442–452.

42. D.G. Armstrong, E.B. Jude, The role of matrix metalloproteinases in wound

healing, J Am Podiatr Med Assoc 92 (2002) 12–18.

43. G. Zhao, M.L. Usui, R.A. Underwood, P.K. Singh, G.A. James, P.S. Stewart, et al.,
Time course study of delayed wound healing in a bioﬁlm-challenged diabetic
mouse model, Wound Repair Regen 20 (2012) 342–352.

44. R. Serra, R. Grande, G. Buffone, V. Molinari, P. Perri, A. Perri, et al., Extracellular
matrix assessment of
role of
infected chronic venous
metalloproteinases and inﬂammatory cytokines, Int Wound J 13 (2016) 53–58.
45. T. Okamoto, T. Akaike, M. Suga, S. Tanase, H. Horie, S. Miyajima, et al.,
Activation of human matrix metalloproteinases by various bacterial
proteinases, J Biol Chem 272 (1997) 6059–6066.

leg ulcers:

46. Tang P, Zhang W, Wang Y, Zhang B, Wang H, Lin C, et al. Effect of
superhydrophobic surface of titanium on Staphylococcus aureus adhesion. J
Nanomater 2011;178921. doi:10.1155/2011/178921.

47. S. Kim, U.T. Jung, S.K. Kim, J.H. Lee, H.S. Choi, C.S. Kim, et al., Nanostructured
multifunctional surface with antireﬂective and antimicrobial characteristics,
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 7 (2015) 326–331.

48. S.K. Kim, J.H. Lee, Bioﬁlm dispersion in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, J Microbiol 54

(2016) 71–75.

49. G.R. Seabrook, C.E. Edmiston, D.D. Schmitt, C. Krepel, D.F. Bandyk, J.B. Towne,
Comparison of serum and tissue antibiotic levels in diabetes-related foot
infections, Surgery 110 (1991) 671–676.

50. S. O’Meara, N. Cullum, M. Majid, T. Sheldon, Systematic reviews of wound care
management: (3) antimicrobial agents for chronic wounds; (4) diabetic foot
ulceration, Health Technol Assess 4 (2000) 1–237.

51. K. Razdan, V.R. Sinha, K.K. Singh, New paradigms in the treatment of skin
infections: lipid nanocarriers to the rescue, in: M. Rahman, S. Beg, V. Kumar, F.
J. Ahmad (Eds.), Nanomedicine for bioactives, Springer, Singapore, 2020:317–
39., https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1664-1_11.

52. N.A. Peppas, J.Z. Hilt, A. Khademhosseini, R. Langer, Hydrogels in biology and
medicine: from molecular principles to bionanotechnology, Adv Mater 18
(2006) 1345–1360.

53. S.J. Rinehart, T. Campbell, K.J. Burke, B. Garcia, A. Mlynarski, S.J. Brain,
Synthesis and characterization of a chitosan/PVA antimicrobial hydrogel
J Microb
nanocomposite for
Biochem Technol 8 (2016) 65–67.

responsive wound management materials,

)

N
E
E
R
G

(

E
T
O
N
Y
E
K

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

54. J. Boateng, O. Catanzano, Advanced therapeutic dressings for effective wound

healing—a review, J Pharm Sci 104 (2015) 3653–3680.

55. R.K. Thapa, H.C. Winther-Larsen, K. Ovchinnikov, H. Carlsen, D.B. Diep, H.H.
Tønnesen, Hybrid hydrogels for bacteriocin delivery to infected wounds, Eur J
Pharm Sci 166 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejps.2021.105990 105990.
56. J.A. Neff, D.F. Bayramov, E.A. Patel, J. Miao, Novel antimicrobial peptides
formulated in chitosan matrices are effective against bioﬁlms of multidrug-
resistant wound pathogens, Mil Med 185 (2020) 637–643.

57. T. Chhibber, V.S. Gondil, V.R. Sinha, Development of chitosan-based hydrogel
containing antibioﬁlm agents for the treatment of Staphylococcus aureus-
infected burn wound in mice, AAPS PharmSciTech 21 (2020) 43, https://doi.
org/10.1208/s12249-019-1537-2.

58. K.K. Patel, D.B. Surekha, M. Tripathi, M.M. Anjum, M.S. Muthu, R. Tilak, et al.,
Antibioﬁlm potential of silver sulfadiazine-loaded nanoparticle formulations: a
study on the effect of DNase-I on microbial bioﬁlm and wound healing activity,
Mol Pharm 16 (2019) 3916–3925.

59. H. Haidari, R. Bright, S. Garg, K. Vasilev, A.J. Cowin, Z. Kopecki, Eradication of
mature bacterial bioﬁlms with concurrent improvement in chronic wound
healing using silver nanoparticle hydrogel treatment, Biomedicines 9 (2021)
1182.

60. J. Wang, X.Y. Chen, Y. Zhao, Y. Yang, W. Wang, C. Wu, et al., pH-Switchable
antimicrobial nanoﬁber networks of hydrogel eradicate bioﬁlm and rescue
stalled healing in chronic wounds, ACS Nano 13 (2019) 11686–11697, https://
doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.9b05608.

61. R.D. Waite, J.E. Stewart, A.S. Stephen, R.P. Allaker, Activity of a nitric oxide-
generating wound treatment system against wound pathogen bioﬁlms, Int J
Antimicrob Agents 52 (2018) 338–343.

62. K. Richter, N. Thomas, J. Claeys, J. McGuane, C.A. Prestidge, T. Coenye, A
topical hydrogel with deferiprone and gallium-protoporphyrin targets bacterial
iron metabolism and has antibioﬁlm activity, Antimicrob Agents Chemother 61
(2017) e00481–e517, https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.00481-17.

63. J. Hurler, K.K. Sørensen, A. Fallarero, P. Vuorela, N.

(cid:2)
Skalko-Basnet, Liposomes-
in-hydrogel delivery system with mupirocin: in vitro antibioﬁlm studies and
in vivo evaluation in mice burn model, BioMed Res Int 2013 (2013), https://doi.
org/10.1155/2013/498485 498485.

chronic infections, Front Microbiol 10 (2019) 198, https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2019.00198.

75. M. Di Giulio, R. Zappacosta, S. Di Lodovico, E. Di Campli, G. Siani, A. Fontana,
L. Cellini, Antimicrobial and antibioﬁlm efﬁcacy of graphene oxide against
chronic wound microorganisms, Antimicrob Agents Chemother 62 (2018)
e00547–e618, https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.00547-18.

76. K. Razdan, V.S. Gondil, S. Chhibber, K.K. Singh, V.R. Sinha, Levoﬂoxacin
loaded clove essential oil nanoscale emulsion as an efﬁcient system against
Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm, J Drug Deliv Sci Technol 68 (2022), https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jddst.2021.103039 103039.

77. D. Metcalf, D. Parsons, P. Bowler, A next-generation antimicrobial wound
dressing: a real-life clinical evaluation in the UK and Ireland, J Wound Care 25
(2016) 132–138.

novel anti-bioﬁlm Hydroﬁber

78. P.G. Bowler, D. Parsons, Combatting wound bioﬁlm and recalcitrance with a
wound dressing, Wound Med 14 (2016) 6–11.
79. Metcalf DG, Bowler PG. Clinical impact of an anti-bioﬁlm Hydroﬁber dressing
in hard-to-heal wounds previously managed with traditional antimicrobial
products and systemic antibiotics. Burns Trauma 2020;8:tkaa004. doi:10.1093/
burnst/tkaa004.

(cid:3)

80. K. Tang, X.H. Zhang, Quorum quenching agents: resources for antivirulence

therapy, Mar Drugs 12 (2014) 3245–3282.

81. S. Favre-Bonté, T. Köhler, C. Van Delden, Bioﬁlm formation by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa: role of the C4-HSL cell-to-cell signal and inhibition by azithromycin,
J Antimicrob Chemother 52 (2003) 598–604, https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/
dkg397.

82. I. Francolini, P. Norris, A. Piozzi, G. Donelli, P. Stoodley, Usnic acid, a natural
antimicrobial agent able to inhibit bacterial bioﬁlm formation on polymer
surfaces, Antimicrob Agents Chemother 48 (2004) 4360–4365.

83. C. Kim, J. Kim, H.Y. Park, H.J. Park, J.H. Lee, C.K. Kim, et al., Furanone
derivatives as quorum-sensing antagonists of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 80 (2008) 37–47.

84. N. Ramasubbu, L.M. Thomas, C. Ragunath, J.B. Kaplan, Structural analysis of
from the
J Mol Biol 349

bioﬁlm-releasing
dispersin
periodontopathogen Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans,
(2005) 475–486.

hydrolase

glycoside

B,

a

64. T.T. Yuan, A.M. Foushee, M.C. Johnson, A.R. Jockheck-Clark, J.M. Stahl,
oxide/ﬁbrinogen
Development
biocomposite for potential wound healing applications, Nanoscale Res Lett 13
(2018) 88, https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-018-2491-8.

chitosan-polyethylene

electrospun

of

85. Z. Qin, Y. Ou, L. Yang, Y. Zhu, T. Tolker-Nielsen, S. Molin, et al., Role of
autolysin-mediated DNA release in bioﬁlm formation of Staphylococcus
epidermidis, Microbiology 153 (2007) 2083–2092.

86. M.O. Pereira, I. Machado, M. Simoes, M.J. Vieira, Preventing bioﬁlm formation

65. D.W.C. Chen, S.J. Liu, Nanoﬁbers used for delivery of antimicrobial agents,

using surfactants, Bioﬁlm Club (2007) 167–174.

Nanomedicine 10 (2015) 1959–1971.

66. Y. Su, H. Wang, B. Mishra, J. Lakshmaiah Narayana, J. Jiang, D.A. Reilly,
Nanoﬁber dressings
topically delivering molecularly engineered human
cathelicidin peptides for the treatment of bioﬁlms in chronic wounds, Mol
Pharm 16 (2019) 2011–2020.

67. N. Alhusein, I.S. Blagbrough, M.L. Beeton, A. Bolhuis, A. Paul, Electrospun Zein/
PCL ﬁbrous matrices release tetracycline in a controlled manner, killing
Staphylococcus aureus both in bioﬁlms and ex vivo on pig skin, and are
compatible with human skin cells, Pharm Res 33 (2016) 237–246.

68. J.S. Boateng, K.H. Matthews, H.N. Stevens, G.M. Eccleston, Wound healing
dressings and drug delivery systems: a review, J Pharm Sci 97 (2008) 2892–2923,
https://doi.org/10.1002/jps.21210.

69. M. Choi, N. Hasan, J. Cao, J. Lee, S.P. Hlaing, J.W. Yoo, Chitosan-based nitric
oxide-releasing dressing for anti-bioﬁlm and in vivo healing activities in MRSA
bioﬁlm-infected wounds, Int J Biol Macromol 142 (2020) 680–692.

70. S. Yang, Y. Yang, S. Cui, Z. Feng, Y. Du, Z. Song, et al., Chitosan-polyvinyl
alcohol nanoscale liquid ﬁlm-forming system facilitates MRSA-infected wound
healing by enhancing antibacterial and antibioﬁlm properties,
J
Int
Nanomedicine 13 (2018) 4987–5002, https://doi.org/10.2147/IJN.S161680.
71. Y.H. Choi, H.K. Han, Nanomedicines: current status and future perspectives in
aspect of drug delivery and pharmacokinetics, J Pharm Investig 48 (2018) 43–
60.

72. M.A. Ansari, H.M. Khan, A.A. Khan, S.S. Cameotra, M.A. Alzohairy, Anti-bioﬁlm
efﬁcacy of silver nanoparticles against MRSA and MRSE isolated from wounds in
a tertiary care hospital, Indian J Med Microbiol 33 (2015) 101–109, https://doi.
org/10.4103/0255-0857.148402.

87. J. Coronel-León, A.M. Marqués,

J. Bastida, A. Manresa, Optimizing the
production of the biosurfactant lichenysin and its application in bioﬁlm
control, J Appl Microbiol 120 (2016) 99–111.

88. J.M. Dow, L. Crossman, K. Findlay, Y.Q. He, J.X. Feng, J.L. Tang, Bioﬁlm
dispersal in Xanthomonas campestris is controlled by cell-cell signaling and is
required for full virulence to plants, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100 (2003) 10995–
11000.

89. S. Santhakumari, N.M. Nilofernisha, J.G. Ponraj, S.K. Pandian, A.V. Ravi, In vitro
and in vivo exploration of palmitic acid from Synechococcus elongatus as an
antibioﬁlm agent on the survival of Artemia franciscana against virulent vibrios,
J Invertebr Pathol 150 (2017) 21–31, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jip.2017.09.001.
90. M. Nicol, S. Alexandre, J.B. Luizet, M. Skogman, T. Jouenne, S.P. Salcedo, et al.,
Unsaturated fatty acids affect quorum sensing communication system and
inhibit motility and bioﬁlm formation of Acinetobacter baumannii, Int J Mol Sci
19 (2018) 214, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19010214.

91. S.L. Percival, P. Kite, K. Eastwood, R. Murga, J. Carr, M.J. Arduino, et al.,
Tetrasodium EDTA as a novel central venous catheter lock solution against
bioﬁlm, Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 26 (2005) 515–519.

92. I. Raad, I. Chatzinikolaou, G. Chaiban, H. Hanna, R. Hachem, T. Dvorak, et al.,
In vitro and ex vivo activities of minocycline and EDTA against microorganisms
embedded in bioﬁlm on catheter surfaces, Antimicrob Agents Chemother 7
(2003) 3580–3585.

93. N. Barraud, D. Schleheck, J. Klebensberger, J.S. Webb, D.J. Hassett, S.A. Rice,
et al., Nitric oxide signaling in Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlms mediates
phosphodiesterase activity, decreased cyclic di-GMP levels, and enhanced
dispersal, J Bacteriol 191 (2009) 7333–7342.

73. S.M. Ghaseminezhad, S.A. Shojaosadati, R.L. Meyer, Ag/Fe3O4 nanocomposites
penetrate and eradicate S. aureus bioﬁlm in an in vitro chronic wound model,
Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces 163 (2018) 192–200, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.colsurfb.2017.12.035.

94. R.P. Howlin, K. Cathie, L. Hall-Stoodley, V. Cornelius, C. Duignan, R.N. Allan,
et al., Low-dose nitric oxide as targeted anti-bioﬁlm adjunctive therapy to treat
chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in cystic ﬁbrosis, Mol Ther 25 (2017)
2104–2116.

74. L. Grassi, G. Batoni, L. Ostyn, P. Rigole, S. Van den Bossche, A.C. Rinaldi, et al.,
The antimicrobial peptide lin-SB056-1 and its dendrimeric derivative prevent
Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation in physiologically relevant models of

95. M. Yasir, M.D. Willcox, D. Dutta, Action of antimicrobial peptides against
https://doi.org/

bioﬁlms, Materials

(2018)

2468,

11

bacterial
10.3390/ma11122468.

www.drugdiscoverytoday.com 2149

KEYNOTE (GREEN)

Drug Discovery Today d Volume 27, Number 8 d August 2022

96. A. Di Somma, A. Moretta, C. Canè, A. Cirillo, A. Duilio, Antimicrobial and

antibioﬁlm peptides. Biomolecules 10 (2020) 652.

97. Y. Luo, Y. Song, Mechanism of antimicrobial peptides: antimicrobial, anti-

98. Oates A. The effect of aquacel

inﬂammatory and antibioﬁlm activities, Int J Mol Sci 22 (2021) 11401.
(cid:3)

Ag+ extra dressing on wound bioﬁlms
(NCT02228122). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02228122. Published
August 28, 2014. Updated December 2, 2015. Accessed February 5, 2022.

99. The Metis Foundation. Procellera

compared to standard of care treatment in
mitigating
and burn wounds
(NCT04079998). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04079998. Published
September 6, 2014. Updated January 22, 2021. Accessed February 5, 2022.

bioﬁlm formation in acute

trauma

(cid:3)

100. Georgetown University. Investigation of a novel wound gel to improve wound
healing in chronic wounds (NCT03686904). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/
show/NCT03686904. Published September 27, 2018. Updated February 5,
2020. Accessed February 5, 2022.

101. Gordillo G. Bioﬁlm infection in adults

and children burn injury
(NCT03248154). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03248154. Published
August 14, 2017. Updated January 4, 2022. Accessed February 5, 2022.
102. Brock Liden, DPM. Activated carbon interphase effect on bioﬁlm and total
bacterial
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT03461783. Published March 12, 2018. Updated February 27, 2019.
Accessed February 5, 2022.

(NCT03461783).

load

K
E
Y
N
O
T
E

(

G
R
E
E
N

)

2150 www.drugdiscoverytoday.com

