www.nature.com/npjbioﬁlms

OPEN

REVIEW ARTICLE
Strategy to combat bioﬁlms: a focus on bioﬁlm dispersal
enzymes
Shaochi Wang 1,2, Yanteng Zhao2, Alexandra P. Breslawec3, Tingting Liang4, Zhifen Deng2, Laura L. Kuperman 3,5 ✉
Qiuning Yu 1 ✉

and

Bacterial bioﬁlms, which consist of three-dimensional extracellular polymeric substance (EPS), not only function as signaling
networks, provide nutritional support, and facilitate surface adhesion, but also serve as a protective shield for the residing bacterial
inhabitants against external stress, such as antibiotics, antimicrobials, and host immune responses. Bioﬁlm-associated infections
account for 65-80% of all human microbial infections that lead to serious mortality and morbidity. Tremendous effort has been
spent to address the problem by developing bioﬁlm-dispersing agents to discharge colonized microbial cells to a more vulnerable
planktonic state. Here, we discuss the recent progress of enzymatic eradicating strategies against medical bioﬁlms, with a focus on
dispersal mechanisms. Particularly, we review three enzyme classes that have been extensively investigated, namely glycoside
hydrolases, proteases, and deoxyribonucleases.
npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes  

 (2023) 9:63  ; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41522-023-00427-y

;
,
:
)
(
0
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

INTRODUCTION
Bacterial Bioﬁlms
Bacterial bioﬁlms consist of surface-attached, and sometimes non-
surface attached, colonies embedded within a self-produced
extracellular matrix known as the extracellular polymeric sub-
stance (EPS). The EPS is composed of extracellular proteins, lipids,
nucleic acids (extracellular-DNA and extracellular-RNA), polysac-
charides, and secondary metabolites1–3 Bioﬁlms are not only
capable of reversible surface attachment, but also serve to trap
nutrients, as well as shield cells against host immune responses
and antimicrobial treatments4 Besides these functional roles, the
EPS also provides structural support and holds the bacterial cells in
close proximity,
thereby enabling the exchange of genetic
material and facilitating quorum sensing5,6 Bioﬁlm-associated
infections are common and account for 65-80% of all human
infections7, such as vaginitis8, colitis9, conjunctivitis10,
microbial
gingivitis11, urethritis12, and otitis13. Additionally, bioﬁlms formed
by adherent bacteria on medical implants and devices can result
in serious mortality and morbidity14 Furthermore, sessile bacterial
colonies covered by established bioﬁlms are more difﬁcult to
eradicate than planktonic cells. Bioﬁlms not only function as the
physical shield against exogeneous stress, but also lower the
metabolic rates of the inhabiting cells to survive harsh environ-
ments. As a result, bioﬁlm-associated infections are difﬁcult to
chronic
eradicate and pose a danger
persistentillnesses15.

to prevalence of

Bioﬁlm formation
Bioﬁlm formation proves to occur in diverse scenarios and the
environment poses a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on bioﬁlm establish-
ment
through impacting gene expression and modulating
bacteria behaviors. As shown in Fig. 1, an expanded bioﬁlm
model was proposed by Sauer et al. and is still growing to reﬂect
all processes involved in the bioﬁlm life cycle16. The most

that,

commonly accepted model of bioﬁlm formation, typically based
on the in vitro bioﬁlm developed by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, can
be subdivided into ﬁve major stages5. In the beginning, individual
planktonic cells, or preformed aggregates in some cases, migrate
and reversibly adhere to a surface. If the surface is suitable for
growth, the newly adherent bacterial cells proliferate and initiate
bioﬁlm production on the surface. Then,
the adherent cells
irreversibly attach to the surface, facilitating cell aggregation and
EPS production. Later, the bioﬁlm reaches the ﬁrst stage of
maturation (maturation I) and starts to develop mushroom-like
structures, which becomes more layered and develop three-
dimensional microstructures, including nutrient and water chan-
the bioﬁlm reaches a fully mature status
nels. After
(maturation II) with maximal cell density and is now regarded as
a three-dimensional community17. In the ﬁnal stage, the mature
bioﬁlm releases planktonic cells, with the help of hydrolase
enzymes, to migrate and spread to new, unoccupied surfaces18,19.
However, this model does not entirely represent the complex
bioﬁlms formed in the real world including those in industrial,
clinical, and natural environments. Indeed, a more inclusive model
involving three major events was recently proposed: aggregation,
growth, and disaggregation16. Besides the in vitro model, bioﬁlms
also develop in vivo, in situ, and ex vivo, each of which follows
different bioﬁlm developmental pathways in response to diverse
environmental
In various settings such as on cell
surfaces, in ﬂuids, and on transplant devices, surface association
is not required and diversely shaped microbial communities are
observed. Additionally, in open systems like human gastrointest-
inal and circulatory systems, there tends to be a consistent inﬂux
of new microbial bodies or bioﬁlm aggregates to microbial
communities undergoing establishment16.

factors16.

Bioﬁlms serve as an effective protective shield for the encased
bacterial cells, providing protection from antimicrobial treatments,
immune responses, bacteriophages, and other external
host

1Otorhinolaryngology Hospital, The First Afﬁliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, 450052 Zhengzhou, China. 2Translational Medicine Center, The First Afﬁliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, 450052 Zhengzhou, China. 3Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20740, USA. 4Key Laboratory of Natural
Medicine and Immune-Engineering of Henan Province, Henan University Jinming Campus, 475004 Kaifeng, Henan, China. 5Present address: Mirimus Inc., 760 Parkside Avenue,
Brooklyn, NY 11226, USA.

email: lkuperma@terpmail.umd.edu; yuqiuning@126.com

✉

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2

S. Wang et al.

;
,
:
)
(
0
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Fig. 1 Expanded bioﬁlm formation model. Bacteria can exist as both single cells and bioﬁlm aggregates with regard to environment cues. In
vivo, ex vivo, and in situ, bacteria can remain in a planktonic state or reside within non-surface-attached bioﬁlms and these two existing forms
are interchangeable depending on the environment. The commonly accepted bioﬁlm formation model, typically the in vitro bioﬁlm
developed by P. aeruginosa, can be subdivided into ﬁve major stages consisting of reversible attachment, irreversible attachment, maturation
I, maturation II, and dispersion16.

stressors, which frequently results in persistent and chronic
infections20. In fact, studies have shown that bacteria growing in
bioﬁlms are often thousands of times more tolerant to antibiotic
treatment than their planktonic counterparts21. This is in part due
to the limited diffusion of nutrients throughout the bioﬁlm EPS
resulting in cell heterogeneity (Fig. 2)22. Bacterial cells near the
bioﬁlm surface are highly metabolically active and more
susceptible to antibiotic treatments, while cells in the core of
the bioﬁlm exist within a low-oxygen microenvironment, causing
these cells to have a decreased metabolic rate, facilitating their
resistance to antibiotics23. Furthermore, there is a small sub-
population of cells within the bioﬁlm community, known as
persister cells, that tend to adopt a dormant state with extreme
these
antimicrobial
persister cells contribute signiﬁcantly to the pathogenesis of
bioﬁlm infections25,26. Studies indicate that small populations of
treatment
persister cells are able to survive antimicrobial
regardless of the concentration of antibiotic utilized27. Once the
antibiotic treatment ceases,
these remaining persister cells
repopulate the microbial community and ultimately lead to a
relapsing bioﬁlm infection28.

tolerance24. Despite their small numbers,

Bioﬁlm dispersal strategies
There are a number of promising bioﬁlm eradication strategies
that have been developed to hinder bacterial bioﬁlm formation or
disrupt maturation by dysregulating bioﬁlm growth. These
proactive approaches include the use of antimicrobial peptides
and lipids29–31, medical device surface modiﬁcations32,33, qua-
ternary ammonium compounds (QACs)34, nitric oxide-releasing
compounds35,36,
antibiotic-
conjugation39, and direct surgical removal of bioﬁlm biomass40.

inhibitors37,38,

cell-signaling

Bioﬁlm dispersal is an intense area of study that may lead to the
development of novel agents that inhibit bioﬁlm formation or
promote bioﬁlm cell detachment. Such agents may be useful for
the prevention and treatment of bioﬁlms in a variety of industrial
and clinical settings41.

In clinical settings, enzymes, small molecules, surgical removal,
and other strategies have been successfully applied to break
down bioﬁlms and release microbes to a more vulnerable
planktonic state42. Thus, dispersal agents are utilized to improve
therapeutic outcomes by increasing access of antimicrobials and
host immune cells to the bacteria43. Compared with other bioﬁlm
dispersal strategies, enzymatic treatments have more advantages.
Bioﬁlm-dispersing enzymes are more effective on both growing
and pre-existing bioﬁlms, and relatively low concentrations are
required to achieve high speciﬁcity and efﬁcacy towards the
targeted bioﬁlms. Additionally, antibiotic resistance, the issue that
many small molecule drugs face, is a less likely occurrence for
bioﬁlm-dispersing enzymes, which function extracellularly without
the need to be transported across the outer membrane.

Bioﬁlm dispersal enzymes
Extracellular enzymes can effectively disperse bacterial bioﬁlms by
degrading the EPS, speciﬁcally by targeting exopolysaccharides,
extracellular DNA, and extracellular proteins within in the EPS. By
hydrolyzing the microbe bioﬁlm,
these enzymes initiate the
detachment of sessile bacterial cells and convert them to a
planktonic state, which causes increased susceptibility to anti-
biotics and the host immune system. By laboratory approaches of
isolation or over-expression in model organisms, bioﬁlm-
dispersing enzymes can be procured at high concentrations and
added exogenously to microbial colonies to efﬁciently break down

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

 
S. Wang et al.

3

Fig. 2 The microbial community enclosed by a bioﬁlm serving as a protective layer against external stress. The bioﬁlm EPS protects the
residing bacteria against threats like antibiotics, bacteriophages, and host immune response. While metabolically active surface-residing cells
in the nutrition-rich outer portion of the bioﬁlm may be less resistant to environmental pressure, bottom-residing bacteria have greater
resistance due to their low metabolic rate. Dormant persister cells can repopulate the bacterial community after antibiotic courses, leading to
chronic infections.

bioﬁlms. Herein, we review the recent progress of bioﬁlm
disruption via three major enzyme classes: glycoside hydro-
lases44,45, deoxyribonucleases46,47, and proteases48,49.

Exopolysaccharides within the EPS
As the major component of
the EPS, secreted extracellular
polysaccharides are critical for bioﬁlm integrity. Exopolysacchar-
ides widely exist as structural components in microbial bioﬁlms
including poly-N-acetylglucosamine (dPNAG), alginate, Psl, Pel,
amylose-like glucan, cellulose, galactosaminogalactan, β-(1,3)-
glucan, levan, and inulin (Fig. 3)50–54.

dPNAG Exopolysaccharide. Many medically relevant microbial
pathogens produce a common exopolysaccharide, partially de-
N-acetylated poly β-(1,6)-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (dPNAG), as a key
component of their bioﬁlm matrix (Fig. 3A)55. Both Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria have been conﬁrmed to produce
dPNAG (sometimes referred to as polysaccharide intercellular
adhesin in Gram-positive strains) as a bioﬁlm exopolysaccharide,
including Staphylococcus aureus56, Escherichia coli57, Yersinia
pestis58, Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae59, Aggregatibacter acti-
nomycetemcomitans60, Bordetella species61, Acinetobacter bauman-
nii62, Burkoholderia species63, Klebsiella pneumoniae64, Vibrio
parahaemolyticus65, and Bacillus
Individual dPNAG
polysaccharides are tens to hundreds of monosaccharide units
in length67.
the icaABCD locus is
responsible for dPNAG production, whereas Gram-negative
bacteria the homologous pgaABCD operon regulates its forma-
tion54,68,69. Chemical modiﬁcations of dPNAG,
such as N-
deacetylation and O-succinylation, play key roles in the adhesive-
ness and structural integrity of the bioﬁlm matrices70. In Gram-
IcaB is responsible for the N-deacetylation of
positive bacteria,
PNAG, and O-succinylation of PNAG is catalyzed by IcaC71.
In
Gram-negative bacteria, PgaB C-terminal domain functions as N-
deacetylase towards PNAG polymers72.

In Gram-positive bacteria,

subtilis66.

Alginate exopolysaccharide. Alginate was the ﬁrst and most
thoroughly studied bioﬁlm exopolysaccharide discovered and is
produced by P. aeruginosa, a pathogenic bacterial species
associated with lung infections in cystic ﬁbrosis patients73.
Alginate is composed of β-D-mannuronic acid and its C-5 epimer,
α-L-guluronic acid, connected through (1,4)-glycosidic linkages
(Fig. 3B). Most of the enzymes responsible for alginate biosynth-
esis are encoded by the alg operon (algACD844KEGXLIJF) in the P.
aeruginosa genome74. The synthesis of
the sugar-nucleotide
precursors of alginate require the algACD operon; algA and algD
are found on the alginate operon while algC is located in the
genome at PA532275. Chemical modiﬁcations are commonly
found at the C-2 and C-3 positions of mannuronate residues in
alginate polymers. They are frequently acetylated, which is driven
by the combined effect of the acetyltransferases AlgI, AlgJ, AlgF
and AlgX with varied acetylation rates from 4 to 57%76,77.
In
addition to acetylation, AlgG also catalyzes the epimerization of β-
D-mannuronic acid to α-L-guluronic acid78. Alginate can facilitate
the formation of gel-like structures in the presence of cations,
including sodium and calcium, with functional properties strongly
correlated to the ManA/GulA ratio and sequence79.

Psl exopolysaccharide. Psl exopolysaccharide serves as structural
scaffold, and plays a key role in surface attachment and eDNA
interactions in the bioﬁlm matrix of the opportunistic pathogen, P.
aeruginosa80. The Psl exopolysaccharide contains a penta-
saccharide repeating unit consisting of D-mannose, L-rhamnose,
and deoxyglucose (Fig. 3C). The biosynthesis of
the Psl
exopolysaccharide occurs via a Wzx/Wzy-dependent mechanism
and is accomplished by 12 proteins encoded by the pslABCDEF-
GHIJKL operon73.

Pel exopolysaccharide. Pel
is one of the most phylogenetically
widespread bioﬁlm matrix determinants in both Gram-negative
and Gram-positive bacteria (Fig. 3D)81. A recent study shows that

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

 
4

S. Wang et al.

Fig. 3 Structures of the most common bioﬁlm exopolysaccharides. dPNAG (A), alginate (B), Psl (C), Pel (D), amylose (E), cellulose (F),
galactosaminogalactan (G), β-(1,3)-Glucan (H),
levan (I), and inulin (J), produced by various bacterial species. The important chemical
modiﬁcations are colored.

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

 
S. Wang et al.

5

is a partially de-N-acetylated linear polymer of α-1,4-N-
Pel
acetylgalactosamine, comprised predominantly of dimeric repeats
of galactosamine and N-acetylgalactosamine82. Gram-negative
bacteria, P. aeruginosa, forms Pel-dependent bioﬁlms regulated by
a seven gene operon (pelABCDEFG), whereas numerous Gram-
positive bacterial species use a variant form of this gene cluster
(pelDEADAFG)
In P.
aeruginosa bioﬁlms, PelDEFG mediates sugar polymerization and
transport across the cytoplasm, while PelBC is responsible for
export83,86. PelA exhibits hydrolase and deacetylase activities and
regulates the deacetylation of Pel polymers87.

to produce Pel-like polysaccharide83–85.

Amylose-like glucan. Gram-negative bacterial species, such as
Francisella tularensis and Pasteurella multocida, produce bioﬁlm
matrices containing amylose-like glucan, an exopolysaccharide
made of α-D-glucose units connected through α-(1,4) glycosidic
bonds (Fig. 3E)88,89. In the production of capsular polysaccharide
(CPS) by P. multocida bioﬁlms, which consist of amylose-like
glucan, capsular polysaccharide production was found to be
inversely related to bioﬁlm formation89. Little is known about the
genes of amylose exopolysaccharides; more work is needed to
reveal its biosynthetic mechanism.

Cellulose exopolysaccharide. Cellulose, composed of β-(1,4)-D-
glucose (Glc) monomer subunits (Fig. 3F), has been identiﬁed as
a bioﬁlm matrix component of several bacterial species including
Agrobacterium tumefaciens90, Escherichia coli91, Pseudomonas
ﬂurescens92, and Gluconacetobacter xylinus51. The cellulose biosyn-
thetic and secretive machineries of various bacteria are extremely
diverse, and different bacteria utilize varying bacterial cellulose
synthase (bcs) operons to produce this exopolysaccharide93.
Multiple chains of cellulose can begin to form greater aggregates
through hydrogen bonding interactions between cellulose poly-
this, phosphoethanolamine-modiﬁed
mer
cellulose generated by E. coli is required for extracellular matrix
assembly and bioﬁlm architecture95. The modiﬁcation is catalyzed
by phosphoethanolamine transferase, BcsG,
in the presence of
bioﬁlm-promoting cyclic diguanylate monophosphate95.

strands94. Besides

(GAG),

com-
Galactosaminogalactan. Galactosaminogalactan
monly found in the bioﬁlms of various fungal species,
is a
heteroglycan composed of galactose and N-acetylgalactosamine
(GalNAc) linked by α-(1,4) glycosidic bonds (Fig. 3G)96. In bioﬁlm-
associated infections, GAG serves as an adhesion factor to the host,
and mediates virulence by masking other pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs). The synthesis of GAG is regulated by a
cluster of genes (gtb3, agd3, ega3, sph3, and uge3) encoding ﬁve
eponymic, carbohydrate-active enzymes97. Agd3, categorized as a
carbohydrate esterase family CE18 enzyme, deacetylates GAG in a
metal-dependent manner98. Deacetylation of GAG serves as a key
factor for adherence to hyphae and mediates bioﬁlm formation97.

β-(1,3)-Glucans. β-(1,3)-glucans are glucose polymers mainly
linked by β-(1,3)-glycosidic bonds with branched side chains
attaching to the backbone through 1,6-linkages (Fig. 3H)99.
Synthesis of the linear β-(1,3)-glucan polymer is catalyzed by
UDP-glucose glucosyltransferase in many microbial
species
including Candida albicans, Aspergillus fumigatus and Cryptococcus
neoformans100. β-(1,3)-glucans are the primary components of the
C. albicans bioﬁlm EPS and are important for C. albicans bioﬁlm
formation and stress resistance101.

Levan and inulin (Fig. 3I-J) are two
Fructan exopolysaccharide.
primary fructans discovered in many microbial bioﬁlms including
the genera Acetobacter, Bacillus, Erwinia, Gluconobacter, Halomo-
nas, Microbacterium, Pseudomonas, Streptococcus, and Zymomo-
nas102. Levan is composed of β-(2, 6) glycosidic fructosyl bonds
with occasional β-(2, 1) branching103, while inulin is primarily

comprised of β-(2, 1) fructosyl linkages and some β-(2, 6) linkages
at the branching point104. Microbial levan is synthesized through
transfructosylation by a secreted levansucase (EC: 2.4.1.10) from
sucrose substrates in Bacillus species105.

These exopolysaccharides play important roles in bioﬁlm estab-
lishment and persistence through enhancing structural stability,
defense against environmental stress, adhesion and aggregation of
cells, absorption of exogenous compounds, and providing a carbon
source during starvation. Because of their indispensable function in
bioﬁlm integrity, glycosidase enzymes that target exopolysacchar-
ides are emerging as an effective means to disperse bioﬁlms106–108.
The glycol-hydrolases discussed are in the same order as the
introduced corresponding exopolysaccharides.

Glycoside hydrolase enzymes
dPNAG glycoside hydrolase—Dispersin B. Dispersin B (DspB)
belongs to glycoside hydrolase family 20 (GH20) and was ﬁrst
isolated from Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans109. DspB is
known to hydrolyze the exopolysaccharide dPNAG in bioﬁlm
matrices
through both endo- and exo-glycoside hydrolase
activity110–112. DspB utilizes a substrate-assisted mechanism in
dPNAG hydrolysis in which the substrate’s 2-acetamido group
facilitates glycoside hydrolysis through formation of a character-
istic oxazolinium ion intermediate113. Within the catalytic site, the
amino acid residue, D183, serves as catalytic acid and D184
stabilizes the oxazolinium ion intermediate113.
In vitro studies
show that DspB can effectively disperse bioﬁlms formed by
bacteria like S. aureus, A. actinomycetemcomitans, S. epidermidis, A.
baumannii, K. pneumoniae, E. coli, Burkholderia spp., A. pleurop-
neumoniae, Y. pestis, and P. ﬂuorescens. In an in vivo study, DspB
was prepared into DispersinB® wound gel by Kane Biotech Inc.,
which signiﬁcantly accelerated the healing of both infected and
non-infected dermal wounds compared to controls114. Compared
with wild-type DspB, most DspB mutants present signiﬁcantly
reduced activity on synthetic PNAG probes106,107. However,
DspBE248Q demonstrates remarkably increased dPNAG breakdown
and effective dispersal of S. aureus preformed bioﬁlms115.

dPNAG glycoside hydrolase—PgaB. PgaB is a glycoside hydrolase
encoded by the PNAG biosynthetic operon, namely by the gene
pgaB, and has
the capability to degrade PNAG synthetic
analogues, as well as disrupt PNAG-dependent bioﬁlms formed
by Bordetella pertussis, Staphylococcus carnosus, S. epidermidis, and
E. coli116,117. PgaB is a two-domain periplasmic protein that
contains an N-terminal deacetylase domain that regulates PNAG
deacetylation and a C-terminal PNAG binding domain that
modulates PNAG export118. Detailed analysis shows that PgaB
contains a C-terminal CAZy GH153 family glycosyl hydrolase that
catalyzes the endoglycosidic cleavage of dPNAG containing de-N-
in the −3 binding site116. The
acetylated glucosamine (GlcN)
C-terminal domain of PgaB produced by Bordetella bronchiseptica
has a central cavity within an elongated surface groove that
preferably recognizes the GlcN-GlcNAc-GlcNAc motif
(where
GlcNAc is N-acetylglucosamine), and the catalytic site amino
residue, D474, functions as a catalytic acid to digest the dPNAG
substrate. After hydrolysis, mass spectrometry reveals the GlcN-
GlcNAc-GlcNAc motif at the new reducing end116. This research
shows that PgaB not only serves as a deacetylase within the PNAG
biosynthetic machinery, but also possesses glycoside hydrolase
activity and may be used as a therapeutic agent against PNAG-
dependent bioﬁlm infections116.

Alginate glycoside hydrolase.
In addition to dPNAG hydrolases,
alginate lyase enzymes have been shown to exhibit effective
dispersal of mature bioﬁlms119. Alginate lyases catalyze the
degradation of alginate, and have been isolated from various
organisms with different substrate speciﬁcities,
including algae,

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

 
6

S. Wang et al.

marine mollusks, marine and terrestrial bacteria, and some viruses
and fungi120. Many studies demonstrating the antibioﬁlm activity of
alginases have used crude cell extracts from Flavobacterium
multivorum, but the synergistic effect with antibiotics remains
contradictory121. Two distinct alginate lyase enzymes in F. multi-
vorum extract have been discovered and characterized: one of
which exhibits degradation towards both poly-β-D-mannuronate
(polyM) and poly-α-L-guluronate (polyG), while the other only has
polyG degradation activity119. Only alginate lyase enzymes with
polyM/G activity are effective in destroying preformed mature
bioﬁlms and have a synergistic effect with antibiotics119. A recent
study shows that puriﬁed marine alginate lyase enzyme (AlyP1400)
is able to degrade P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms and enhances bactericidal
activity of
tobramycin, while also modulating
expression of efﬂux antibiotic resistance-related genes; bdlA, mexF,
mexY, and ndvB; suggesting an increased susceptibility of P.
aeruginosa bioﬁlms to this combinatorial treatment122.

the antibiotic,

Psl glycoside hydrolase. PslG, a member of glycoside hydrolase
family 39 (GH39), is periplasmic glycoside hydrolase encoded by the
Psl exopolysaccharide biosynthetic operon123. After removal of the
N-terminal transmembrane domain, PslGh (which has a soluble
catalytically active glycoside hydrolase domain) can hydrolyze Psl in
P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms123. PslGh inhibits clinical and environmental
isolates of P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation over a 24-h period and is
also capable of disrupting newly formed bioﬁlms but is less potent
to disperse mature bioﬁlms. Further, PslGh can potentiate the
antibacterial effect of colistin, an antibiotic used to treat Gram-
negative multi-drug resistant infections124. PslGh is noncytotoxic and
support immune defenses; the enzyme does not impact host cell
morphology and enhances neutrophil killing activity124.

Pel glycoside hydrolase. PelA, a periplasmic glycoside hydrolase
encoded in the Pel exopolysaccharide biosynthetic operons,
contains at least two catalytic domains—a putative glycoside
hydrolase domain and a CE4 deacetylase domain87. Based on a
bioinformatic analysis.
the N-terminal domain of PelA was
removed, generating the PelA47–303 construct (referred as PelAh),
was expressed and puriﬁed in a study of its glycoside hydrolase
activity124. Prophylactic treatment with PelAh resulted in a 2.5-log
reduction of P. aeruginosa bacterial colony-forming units, and
application of PelAh to established bioﬁlms resulted in signiﬁcant
bioﬁlm dispersal within 24 h124. Furthermore bioﬁlm disruption
with PelAh is not sensitive to the maturation state of
the
bioﬁlm124. PelAh also boosted the antibiotic efﬁcacy of colistin
and increased neutrophil killing by ~50%124.

Endo-acting α-amylase, of the glyco-
Amylose glycoside hydrolase.
side hydrolase family 13 (GH13), cleaves α-(1,4)-D-glucosidic linkages
at random sites of amylose exopolysaccharide in bioﬁlm matrices
leading to bioﬁlm dispersing events125. Research shows that α-
amylase from Aspergillus oryzae, Bacillus subtilis, human saliva, and
sweet potato demonstrates a strong inhibiting effect on S. aureus
bioﬁlm buildup, as well as degrade existing pre-formed S. aureus
bioﬁlms126. However, a less severe inhibiting effect was observed
for β-amylase from sweet potato (~50% inhibition versus 77-89%
inhibtion from the others) because it is an exo-acting GH14
carbohydrolase which hydrolyzes the α-1,4-glucosidic linkages of
amylose exopolysaccharide only from the nonreducing end126.

Cellulose glycoside hydrolase. Cellulase is a glycoside hydrolase
produced chieﬂy by fungi, bacteria, and protozoans that acts
speciﬁcally by breaking down the β-(1,4) linkages in polysacchar-
ides, such as cellulose, an exopolysaccharide commonly found in
the bioﬁlm of several bacteria,
including E. coli, Salmonella,
Citrobacter, Enterobacter, and Pseudomonas as well as Agrobacterium
tumefaciens127. Cellulase from various sources such as Penicillium
funiculosum and Trichaderma reseei can inhibit bioﬁlm formation of

P. aeruginosa in a pH dependent manner, in which exogenously
added cellulase is more effective at pH 5 than pH 7128. Treatment
combining cellulase with ceftazidime, an antibiotic, can more
effectively inhibit P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation and attach-
ment129. In vitro testing also shows that Levoﬂoxacin, an antibiotic
for severe infection, combined with cellulase can powerfully
disperse mature bioﬁlms formed by bacille CalmetteGuerin130.

Galactosaminogalactan glycoside hydrolase.
Sph3 is encoded by
the Sph3 gene, which belongs to the ﬁve gene cluster regulating
GAG biosynthesis. The glycol-hydrolase domain (Sph3h) of Sph3 is
classiﬁed as glycoside hydrolase family 135 (GH135)131. Sph3 has the
(β/α)8 fold structure that many glycoside hydrolase enzymes possess,
and contains putative catalytic amino acid residues (Asp-166, Glu-
167, and Glu-222) in the active site131. The hydrolase domains of
Sph3 and PelA (Sph3h and PelAh, respectively) share structural and
functional similarities given their ability to degrade GAG and disrupt
preformed Aspergillus fumigatus bioﬁlms in vitro132. A mechanistic
study revealed that both Sph3h and PelAh function as retaining
endo-α-(1,4)-N-acetylgalactosaminidases producing a minimal sub-
strate size of seven residues132. Ega3 is another gene in the GAG
biosynthesis cluster encoding a putative α-(1,4)-galactosaminidase
belonging to glycoside hydrolase family 114 (GH114) which also has
the (β/α)8 fold structure; its activity depends on the conserved acidic
residues, Asp-189 and Glu-247133. Recombinant Ega3 is an endo-
acting α-(1,4)-galactosaminidase that disrupts GAG-dependent A.
fumigatus and Pel polysaccharide-dependent P. aeruginosa pre-
formed bioﬁlms in vitro at nanomolar concentrations133.

β-(1,3) glucan glycoside hydrolase. β-(1,3) glucanases, which
belong to the pathogenesis-related-2 family (PR-2), are abundant
in nature and have been characterized from a wide range of
species134. They successively cleave at the nonreducing end of β-
glucose134.
(1,3)
β-glucanase derived from Arthrobacter luteus is able to degrade
poly-β-(1,3)-glucose in Candida albicans preformed bioﬁlms
in vitro but has no effect on planktonic growth or adhesion101.

oligosaccharides

producing

glucan

and

Fructan glycoside hydrolase—levanase.
Levanase, SacC, is an exo-
fructosidase belonging to Glycoside Hydrolase Family 32 (GH32)
and hydrolyzes the terminal β-(2,1)- D-fructofuranose residues of
fructans from the non-reducing end135. Levanase SacC is able to
hydrolyze both levan and inulin to produce fructose, and is also
able to hydrolyze sucrose and rafﬁnose135. Levanase cannot be
detected in the wild-type Bacillus subtilis, but levanase SacC could
be found in the culture medium of laboratory grown B. subtilis in
the form of SacL mutated extracellular enzymes136. A recent study
shows that extracellular levanase SacC from B. subtilis disrupts
preformed P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms in vitro, increasing the efﬁciency
of conventional the antibiotics, ciproﬂoxacin and amikacin137.

Fructan glycoside hydrolase—inulinase.
Inulinase is an enzyme
that catalyzes the hydrolysis of β-(2,1)-D-fructosidic linkages in inulin
and is part of a group of naturally occurring polysaccharides138.
Inulinase can be subcategorized into exo-inulinase (EC 3.2.1.80) and
endo-inulinase (EC3.2.1.7) based on hydrolysis patterns. Exo-
inulinase hydrolyzes the terminal fructose residue of inulin from
the non-reducing end, whereas endo-inulinase initiates hydrolysis
at random positions within inulin to give fructooligosaccharides139.
Inulinase is capable of degrading in vitro pre-formed bioﬁlms on
reverse osmosis RO membranes by composed by multiple bacterial
species. The mechanism of its destructive process is degrading the
β-(2, 6)-glucan fructosidic bonds of inulin140 (Table 1).

Proteases
Exoproteins, another major component of the EPS, is account for a
considerable portion of the biomass of most bioﬁlms. Exoproteins

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

 
S. Wang et al.

7

Table 1.

Summary of glycoside hydrolase enzymes as bioﬁlms dispersing agents.

Glycoside Hydrolase Target

Summary

Dispersin B
(DspB)

dPNAG

1. Glycoside hydrolase family 20 (GH20).
2. Hydrolyzes dPNAG via a substrate-assisted mechanism and has both endo- and exo-glycoside hydrolase

PgaB

dPNAG

Alginate Lyase

Alginate

activity.

3. Disperses preformed mature bioﬁlms of various Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial species.

DspBE248Q is more active than the wildtype.

4. Commercialized as wound gel by Kane Biotech Inc, Dispersin B®.
1. Contains a C-terminal CAZy GH153 family of glycosyl hydrolase that catalyzes the endoglycosidic

cleavage of dPNAG.

2. Disrupts PNAG-dependent preformed mature bioﬁlms by B. pertussis, S. carnosus, S. epidermidis, and E. coli.
1. Alginate lyase derived from F. multivorum with polyM/G activity is effective in dispersing preformed

mature bioﬁlms and has a synergistic effect with antibiotics.

2. Marine alginate lyase enzyme (AlyP1400) degrades preformed P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms and enhances the
bactericidal activity of tobramycin by modulating expression of efﬂux antibiotic resistance-related genes.

PslGh

Psl

1. Glycoside hydrolase family 39 (GH39).
2. The glycol-hydrolase domain of PslG, is a periplasmic glycoside hydrolase encoded by the Psl

PelAh

Pel
GAG

Amylase

Amylose

Cellulase

Cellulose

Sph3h

GAG

Ega3

GAG

biosynthetic operon.

3. Inhibits bioﬁlm formation of clinical and environmental isolates of P. aeruginosa over a 24-h period and is

capable of disrupting newly formed bioﬁlms but is less potent to against mature bioﬁlms.

4. PslGh is noncytotoxic and supports host immune responses.
1. PelA47–303 is constructed from the glycoside hydrolase domain of PelA which is a periplasmic enzyme

encoded by the Pel biosynthetic operons.

2. PelAh inhibits bioﬁlms formed by clinical and environmental isolates of P. aeruginosa over a 24-h period. It
is capable of disrupting newly formed bioﬁlms but is less potent against disperse mature bioﬁlms.

3. Boosts the efﬁcacy of colistin and increases neutrophil killing by ~50%.
4. Shares structural and functional similarities with Sph3h, allowing degradation of GAG and disruption of

preformed A. fumigatus bioﬁlms in vitro.

1. Glycoside hydrolase family 13 (GH13).
2. Cleaves α-(1,4)-D-glucosidic linkages at random sites of amylose in bioﬁlms.
3. Has a strong inhibiting effect on forming bioﬁlms and degradation of pre-existing bioﬁlms.
4. β-amylase, an exo-acting GH14 carbohydrolase, is less potent to disrupt bioﬁlms. It hydrolyzes the α-(1,4)-

glucosidic linkages of amylose only from the nonreducing end.

1. Cellulase from various sources, such as P. funiculosum and T. reseei, inhibits bioﬁlm formation of P.

aeruginosa in a pH dependent manner but is less effective for mature bioﬁlms.

2. Cellulase combined with levoﬂoxacin can powerfully disperse mature bioﬁlms formed by B.

CalmetteGuerin.

1. Glycoside hydrolase family 135 (GH135).
2. Glycol-hydrolase domain (Sph3h) of Sph3 is encoded by the GAG biosynthesis gene.
3. A retaining endo-α-(1,4)-N-acetylgalactosaminidase that produces a minimal substrate size of seven

residues.

4. Degrades GAG and disrupts preformed A. fumigatus bioﬁlms in vitro.
1. Glycoside hydrolase family 114 (GH114).
2. Encoded by the GAG biosynthesis cluster, it is an endo-acting α-(1,4)-galactosaminidase.
3. Disrupts GAG-dependent A. fumigatus and Pel-dependent P. aeruginosa preformed bioﬁlms in vitro at

nanomolar concentrations.

(1,3)-β-Glucanase

(1,3)-β-Glucan

1. Exo-acting glycohydrolase, pathogenesis-related-2 family (PR-2), cleaving at the nonreducing end of β-

Levanase SacC

Inulinase

Levan
Inulin
Sucrose Rafﬁnose
Inulin

(1,3) glucan oligosaccharides and glucose.

2. Derived from A. luteus and degrades poly-(1,3)-glucose in C. albicans preformed bioﬁlms in vitro.
1. Exo-fructosidase in glycoside hydrolase family 32 (GH32). Hydrolyzes terminal β-(2, 1)-D-fructofuranose

residues of fructans from the non-reducing end.

2. Can be procured in the culture medium of B. subtilis SacL mutants as extracellular enzymes.
1. Hydrolyzes β-(2, 1)-D-fructosidic linkages in inulin. Subcategorized into exo- and endo-inulinase based on

hydrolysis patterns.

2. Degrades in vitro pre-formed bioﬁlms on reverse osmosis membrane comprised by multiple bacterial

species.

are crucial to bacterial cell aggregation, surface adhesion, and
structural integrity of bioﬁlm matrices141,142. Enzymatic degrada-
tion of EPS exoproteins is one of the most effective ways to
eradicate bioﬁlms. To date, a number of proteases capable of
bioﬁlm dispersal have been discovered and investigated.

Proteinase K. Proteinase K is a broad-spectrum serine protease
with a wide pH tolerance (pH 4 - 12) and thermostability (37 -
It speciﬁcally cleaves peptide bonds in proximity to
60°C)143.

carboxylic groups of aliphatic and aromatic amino acids144.
Proteinase K is capable of inhibiting S. aureus bioﬁlm formation
by hampering early adhesion, but also disperses 24-h- and 48-h-
old bioﬁlms144. Recent
show that co-treatment of
studies
proteinase K with antibiotics has a synergistic effect
that
thoroughly degrades preformed bioﬁlms produced by a range
of bacteria, including S. aureus, E. coli, Staphylococcus lugdunensis,
Staphylococcus heamolyticus, Listeria monocytogenes, Gardnerella
vaginalis, and Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus144–149.

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

 
8

S. Wang et al.

Trypsin, a pancreatic serine protease that speciﬁcally
Trypsin.
acts on the carboxyl side of lysine and arginine, has been applied
to disperse bioﬁlms formed on teeth and wounds150–152. Bovine
trypsin can degrade mature bioﬁlms of various Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacterial species153. Trypsin alone is able to reduce
the preformed 24-h-old bioﬁlms of both P.
the biomass of
aeruginosa and Enterococcus
faecalis but cannot completely
remove bioﬁlms regardless of the treatment time and enzyme
concentrations154. However, trypsin combined with pepsin and
Carvacrol is able to fully disperse mature bioﬁlms of P. aeruginosa
and E. faecalis on various abiotic surfaces154.

Pepsin. Pepsin is a promiscuous endopeptidase with a catalytic
aspartate in its active site to favorably cleave Phe and Leu residues;
however, His, Lys, Arg, and Pro residues prohibit cleavage155. Pepsin
reduces the biomass of the preformed 24-h-old bioﬁlms of both P.
aeruginosa and E. faecalis, but cannot completely remove bioﬁlms
from polystyrene surfaces regardless of the treatment time and
enzyme concentrations used, like trypsin154. Co-administered with
trypsin and carvacrol,
it can effectively irradicate preformed P.
aeruginosa and E. faecalis bioﬁlms154,156.

Aureolysin. Aureolysin (Aur), an S. aureus expressed extracellular
metalloprotease, down-regulates the formation of bioﬁlms and
allows for the mobility of bacteria by cleavage of surface binding
proteins, such as clumping factor B which causes loss of ﬁbrinogen
binding in S. aureus157. Aur is a major contributor to bacterial
the innate host
pathogenicity via cleaving components of
immune system and regulating bacterial toxins and cell wall
proteins158,159. Aur is associated with the processing of other
bioﬁlm proteases, such as V8, SspB, and ScpA which together are
known as the Staphylococcal proteolytic cascade. These proteases
are secreted into the environment with the pro-peptide inhibiting
their activation. Aur undergoes autocatalysis and becomes active
by the degrading the pro-peptide, then mature aur cleaves the
pro-peptide from V8 to generate active V8 protease. Finally, V8 will
cleave the SspB pro-peptide to complete cascade48. Puriﬁed aur
suppresses bioﬁlm formation and disperses established bioﬁlms of
various S. aureus strains160.

V8 serine protease.
The V8 serine protease, also known as SspA
protease, is the major extracellular protease secreted by S. aureus. It
is secreted as a proenzyme before being proteolytically cleaved by
aur to become the mature V8 enzyme48. Research shows that
V8 serine protease added at the beginning of cell culture prevents
the S. epidermidis bioﬁlm formation by degrading Bap protein, a
surface-anchored protein161. Esp protease, produced by S. epidermi-
dis, is structurally highly similar to that of V8. Puriﬁed Esp protease
prevents bioﬁlm formation, promotes disassembly of pre-established
bioﬁlms by cleaving autolysin (Atl)-derived murein hydrolases, and
prevents staphylococcal release of extracellular DNA49.

Staphopain A (ScpA), encoded by the scpAB
Staphopain A.
operon,
is also a participant of the staphylococcal proteolytic
cascade. It is an extracellular cysteine protease generated by S.
aureus and demonstrates a very broad range of substrate
speciﬁcity162. Puriﬁed ScpA inhibits S. aureus formation and
disperses established bioﬁlms. The antibioﬁlm properties of ScpA
are conserved across S. aureus strain lineages. Additionally,
inhibition of ScpA restores the bioﬁlm forming capacity of the
bioﬁlm-negative S. aureus mutant, the sigma factor B (ΔsigB)
mutantt163. Puriﬁed ScpA enzyme inhibited S. aureus formation as
well as to disperse the established bioﬁlms, and the antibioﬁlm
properties of ScpA were conserved across S. aureus strain
lineages163.

Staphopain B.
Staphopain B (SspB) is encoded by the sspABC
operon and is a cysteine protease secreted by S. aureus. SspA

cleaves proSspB to activate SspB in the last step of
the
staphylococcal proteolytic cascade48. Silencing expression of SspB
can enable the bioﬁlm-deﬁcient S. aureus mutant (ΔsigB) to gain
bioﬁlm-forming abilities163. However, bacteria-derived proteinase
could facilitate the bacterial colony survival by degrading
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) generated by the host immune
system, which leads to chronic infections164. Fragments of the
AMP, cathelicidin LL-37, have been discovered as part of the
innate immune response in skin diseases such as atopic dermatitis
and acne rosacea164. S. aureus derived proteinases aureolysin, V8,
and SspB have been observed in staphylococcal
isolates from
atopic dermatitis patients and contributed to bacterial virulence
through degradation of the AMP cathelicidin LL-37, resulting in
loss of inhibitory activity on bioﬁlm formation and ultimately
leading to bacterial persistence in atopic dermatitis165.

Spl proteases consists of

SplABCDEF.
six serine proteases,
SplABCDEF, encoded by the νSaβ gene in S. aureus166. Spl
proteases modulate S. aureus physiology and virulence, and can
induce disseminated lung damage during pneumonia likely by
degrading surface-associated proteins
in staphylococcal and
human proteins166. In S. aureus, deletion of the genes encoding
the extracellular proteases, aureolysin and Spl, encourages bioﬁlm
formation in planktonic cells167. These ﬁndings indicate that Spl
proteases have the ability to disperse S. aureus bioﬁlms, but more
research is needed to elucidate the dispersal mechanism.

Endogenous surface
Surface protein-releasing enzyme (SPRE).
protein-releasing enzyme (SPRE), produced by S. mutans NG8,
can disperse the preformed monolayer bioﬁlm of S. mutans and
detach cells from colonized surfaces168. SPRE cleaves the bacterial
surface anchoring protein, adhesin P1, by dissociating the bonds
between the C-terminus of adhesin P1 and other cell surface
components169. SPRE degrades preformed bioﬁlms in a pH-
dependent manner with the optimal pH range from 5 to 6, and
can also detach bioﬁlms of non-dividing cells, indicating that cells
detached from bioﬁlms were not daughter cells168.

Streptococcal cysteine
Streptococcal cysteine protease (SpeB).
protease (SpeB)
secreted by Streptococcus pyogenes, an
is
exclusively Gram-positive human pathogen that causes a wide
spectrum of diseases such as pharyngitis, impetigo, toxic shock,
and necrotizing fasciitis170. SpeB is a promiscuous enzyme
displaying a broad range enzymatic activities including degrada-
tion of bioﬁlm, cytokines, chemokines, complement components,
immunoglobulins, and serum protease inhibitors. It is also capable
of degrading and releasing other streptococcal proteins from the
bacterial surface170. The constitutive production of SpeB by an S.
pyogenes mutant strain is responsible for a signiﬁcant reduction of
bioﬁlm formation. Beyond this, addition of puriﬁed SpeB to
actively growing wild-type cultures signiﬁcantly inhibits bioﬁlm
formation171. SpeB disperses bioﬁlms and facilitates bacterial
colonization and occupation of new areas, resulting in infections
caused by S. pyogenes to vary from mild to severe172. However, a
recent study shows that SpeB exhibits potent activity towards
bioﬁlm disruption at multiple stages of S. aureus bioﬁlm formation
by cleaving SdrC adhesin, which renders the bacteria more
immune
to
susceptible
components173.

antimicrobial

agents

host

and

is

Peptidase M16. Peptidase M16
a Microbacterium sp.
SKS10 secreted metalloprotease that exhibits optimal activity at
60°C, pH 12174. Peptidase M16 shows low cytotoxicity and
excellent stability in the presence of various salts and organic
solvents. Besides this, peptidase M16 can disperse mature S.
aureus bioﬁlms at concentrations lower
than trypsin and α-
amylase, and can be co-treated with kanamycin to enhance
antimicrobial efﬁcacy174 (Table 2).

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

 
Table 2.

Summary of proteases as bioﬁlm dispersing agents.

S. Wang et al.

9

Protease

Proteinase K

Trypsin

Pepsin

Aureolysin
(Aur)

V8 serine protease
(V8)
(SspA)

Staphopain A
(ScpA)

Staphopain B
(SspB)

Spl proteases

Surface protein releasing enzyme
(SPRE)

Summary

1. Broad-spectrum serine protease with remarkable pH tolerance and thermostability.
2. Inhibits new bioﬁlm formation and disperses preformed bioﬁlms of various bacterial strains.
1. Pancreatic serine protease that speciﬁcally acts on the carboxyl side of lysine and arginine.
2. Degrades mature bioﬁlms of various Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial species.
1. Promiscuous endopeptidase with a catalytic aspartate in its active site to favorably cleave Phe and Leu

residues.

2. Reduces the biomass of preformed bioﬁlms of both P. aeruginosa and E. faecalis.
1. S. aureus expressed extracellular metalloprotease.
2. Puriﬁed aureolysin can suppress bioﬁlm formation and disperse established bioﬁlms of various S. aureus

strains.

1. The main extracellular protease secreted by S. aureus.
2. Prevents formation of S. epidermidis bioﬁlms by degrading Bap, a surface-anchored protein.

1. Extracellular promiscuous cysteine protease generated by S. aureus.
2. Puriﬁed ScpA inhibits S. aureus bioﬁlm formation and disperses established bioﬁlms.
1. Secreted cysteine protease by S. aureus.
2. Inhibition enables the bioﬁlm-deﬁcient S. aureus mutant (ΔsigB) to restore bioﬁlm forming abilities.
3. Degrades the AMP, cathelicidin LL-37, resulting in loss of inhibitory activity on bioﬁlm formation.
1. Consists of six serine proteases, SplABCDEF, modulating S. aureus physiology and virulence.
2. Degrade surface-associated proteins in S. aureus, and deletion of the genes encoding the extracellular Spl

proteases encourages bioﬁlm formation.

1. Produced by Streptococcus mutans NG8, it can disperse the preformed monolayer bioﬁlm of Streptococcus

mutans.

2. Cleaves the bacterial surface anchoring protein, adhesin P1.

Streptococcal cysteine protease (SpeB) 1. Secreted by S. pyogenes, a Gram-positive human pathogen causing a wide spectrum of diseases.
2. Disperse bioﬁlms and facilitates bacterial occupation of new areas, leading to serious infections.
3. Exhibits potent bioﬁlm disruptive activity at multiple stages of S. aureus bioﬁlm formation by cleaving SdrC

adhesin.

Peptidase M16

1. Metalloprotease secreted by Microbacterium sp. SKS10.
2. Disperses mature S. aureus bioﬁlms at low concentrations and can be co-treated with kanamycin to

enhance antimicrobial efﬁcacy.

Deoxyribonucleases
is a ubiquitous and vital structural
Extracellular DNA (eDNA)
including microbial
the EPS with functions
component of
signaling, gene transfer, and bioﬁlm matrix
adhesion, cell
stabilization175–177. Despite the importance of eDNA in bacterial
bioﬁlms,
it had not attracted much attention until 2002 when
Whitchurch et al. exogenously added DNase I to disperse bioﬁlms
and boost bactericidal efﬁciency when combined with antibio-
tics46. Since then, substantial work has been done to employ
various DNases targeting eDNA to eradicate bioﬁlm infections.

It

DNase I. DNase I is a widely used pancreatic endonuclease that
speciﬁcally digests DNA.
is secreted in the extracellular
environment
to degrade both single-stranded and double-
stranded DNA into oligonucleotides with 5′ monophosphate and
3′ hydroxyl DNA ends178,179. DNase I can disrupt the formation of
both mono- and polymicrobial bioﬁlms179. Bioﬁlms formed in the
presence of DNase I display reduced bioﬁlm biomass,
total
bacterial biomass, decreased viability of bacteria, and decreased
tolerance to antibiotics180. However, DNase I
is more effective
rapidly growing bioﬁlms. Newly
towards the destruction of
established bioﬁlms (up to 60-h old) were also dissolved by
DNase I treatment, whereas more mature bioﬁlms (over 84-h old)
exhibited strong resistance to DNase I degradation. This is likely
due to mature bioﬁlms being strengthened by other substances
such as exopolysaccharides and exoproteins, additionally, mature
bioﬁlms may have produced sufﬁcient proteolytic exoenzymes to
locally inactivate DNase I46. Besides this, recombinant human
DNase I (rhDNase) has been clinically applied in cystic ﬁbrosis
patients to reduce the viscosity of purulent sputum181. rhDNase
exhibits strong antibioﬁlm activity and reduces the antibiotic

resistance of S. aureus and S. epidermidis182. Recent studies show
that DNase I also presents a wide compatibility with various
antimicrobial agents such as ceftazidime, proteinase K, and silver
sulfadiazine183–185. DNase I-like protein 2 (DNase1L2), found in the
human stratum corneum of the epidermis, is able to suppress P.
aeruginosa and S. aureus bioﬁlm formation,
indicating that
DNase1L2 is an innate antimicrobial defense of the epidermis186.

Nucleases Xds and Dns.
Extracellular nucleases, Xds and Dns, are
produced by Vibrio cholerae and act as virulence factors in an
infant mouse cholera model187. Xds, a Mg2+ dependent nuclease,
belongs to the protein family PF03372 and exerts both endo- and
exonuclease activity188. Dns, also known as VcEndA, belongs to
the endonuclease I superfamily and does not have a speciﬁc
nucleic acid cleavage site189. These two extracellular nucleases can
degrade both circular and linearized DNA within bioﬁlms, and
the genes encoding these nucleases results in
deletion of
increased bioﬁlm formation47.
It would be worth directly
determining their bioﬁlm dispersing activity since Xds and Dns
are secreted enzymes with good stability.

Streptodornase, also known as Varidase,

is a
Streptodornase.
commercial mixture of
four DNase enzymes produced by P.
aeruginosa, which reduces the viscosity of bioﬁlm matrices by
digesting the eDNA of bioﬁlms190. An in vitro study found
streptodornase is more active against the pre-formed bioﬁlms of
P. aeruginosa than DNase I, and has been successfully applied in P.
aeruginosa focal infections, such as urinary tract infection191.

NucB. NucB, a bioﬁlm-dispersing nuclease from the marine
Bacillus licheniformis strain, also disperses newly formed bioﬁlms

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

 
10

S. Wang et al.

Table 3.

Summary of deoxyribonucleases as bioﬁlms dispersing agents.

Deoxyribonuclease

Summary

DNase I

Nuclease Xds

Nuclease Dns
(VcEndA)

Streptodornase
(Varidase)

NucB

1. Widely used pancreatic endonuclease speciﬁc to the digestion of both single-stranded and double-stranded DNA.
2. More effective at preventing bioﬁlm formation, and disrupts newly formed bioﬁlms better than mature bioﬁlms.
3. rhDNase has been clinically applied in cystic ﬁbrosis patients to combat bacterial infection.
1. Secreted Mg2+ dependent nuclease produced by V. cholerae with both endo and exo activity.
2. Belongs to protein family PF03372 and can degrade both circular and linearized DNA within bioﬁlms.
3. Deletion of its encoding gene increases bioﬁlm formation.
1. Member of endonuclease I superfamily produced by V. cholerae.
2. Degrades both circular and linearized DNA within bioﬁlms.
3. Deletion of its encoding gene increases bioﬁlm formation.
1. Mixture of four DNase enzymes produced by P. aeruginosa.
2. Actively disrupts in vitro preformed bioﬁlms of P. aeruginosa and is used against P. aeruginosa focal infections.
1. ββα metal-dependent nuclease derived from marine B. licheniformis disperses preformed bioﬁlms by degrading eDNA.
2. Degrades the preformed bioﬁlms of bacterial strains isolated from chronic rhinosinusitis infections.

It

is a non-speciﬁc endonuclease
by degradation of eDNA.
belonging to the ββα metal-dependent nuclease subfamily192,
and can degrade preformed bioﬁlms of coagulase-negative
staphylococci, S. aureus, and α-hemolytic streptococci isolated from
chronic rhinosinusitis infections, offering a promising therapeutic
approach for chronic rhinosinusitis patients193 (Table 3).

Current barriers and future directions of bioﬁlm-dispersing
enzymes
Utilization of enzymes to disperse bioﬁlms has been a popular
research topic for decades, and a number of dispersing enzymes
have proven effective for inhibiting bioﬁlm formation in diverse in
vivo animal infection models including wound, nasal cavity, lung,
and urinary tract108. Further, the rhDNase I, Dornase alfa, has been
applied via inhalation in cystic ﬁbrosis patients to reduce the
viscosity of purulent sputum by preventing the establishment of
chronic P. aeruginosa infection through inhibiting bioﬁlm forma-
tion181. DispersinB® wound gel developed by Kane Biotech Inc.
showed positive results in biocompatibility and in vivo preclinical
studies and has been undergoing human clinical trials since 2022114.
However, in practice most enzymatic bioﬁlm eradication assays are
carried out by in vitro testing against monomicrobial bioﬁlms instead
of multispecies-based bioﬁlms that occur in nature. Thus, advancing
the research of bioﬁlm-dispersing enzymes is bottlenecked by the
lack of the reliable bioﬁlm models that mimic the true complexity of
microbial colonization in humans and the world we live in.

Scientists must ascertain the compatibility of these enzymes
and antibiotics with prudence. In order to enhance the potency of
bioﬁlm eradication, bioﬁlm dispersing enzymes are always co-
administered with antimicrobial agents, thereby providing an
entryway to allow the antibiotics reach to the bacteria194.
However, antibiotics can impact bioﬁlm dispersing enzymes, for
example, S. aureus micrococcal nuclease activity is modulated by
sub-minimum inhibitory concentrations of antibiotics such as
erythromycin and doxycycline195. Besides this, antibiotics bearing
varied pKa values may also inﬂuence the activity of dispersing
enzymes,
ranges of pH
tolerance are more likely to be regarded as potential candidates
for co-administration196. In the early stages of development, it is
necessary to systematically characterize dispersing enzymes using
artiﬁcial substrates that may need organic solvents in the testing
buffer197. In preparations for manufacture and storage, enzymes
therapeutic
thermostability will be favored for
with better
development196. Therefore, it is necessary to consider enzymatic
stability; including by not limited to thermostability, pH tolerance,
and durability in organic solvents; when developing such dispersal
agents for clinical application. Bioﬁlm-dispersing enzymes, such as
peptidase M16 and proteinase K, demonstrate remarkable stability

thus robust enzymes with greater

in organic solvents, a wide pH tolerance, and great thermostability
(37-60°C)143,174, but not all enzymes can maintain activity under
harsh conditions. For example, DspB will denature when over 5%
DMSO is present in solution106, and SPRE disperses bioﬁlm in a pH-
dependent manner, ranging between pH 5 – 6168.

Toxicity is another issue to be addressed in the development of
enzymatic bioﬁlm dispersal approaches, as these exogeneous agents
could elicit strong immune responses or exhibit cellular toxicity. In a
study on glycosidases to degrade bioﬁlm, a total of 12 glycol-
hydrolases including alginate lyase, amylase, amyloglucosidase,
xylanase, cellulase, and pectinase were found to be cytotoxic
towards human epithelial ﬁbroblasts and human normal colonic
cells108. Furthermore, xylanase displayed harmful effects in wound
tissue at the wound site and even negatively impacted the spleen108.
Additionally, dispersing enzymes cannot achieve bactericidal
activity and even facilitate bacterial colonization of new areas,
leading to new or ongoing infections172. Research even shows
that aureolysin and staphopain are able to degrade AMPs
produced by the host immune system, resulting chronic atopic
dermatitis172. Thus, bioﬁlm dispersal enzymes are always com-
bined with an antibiotic or other therapies to combat bacterial
infections and may come into clinical applications in the near
future, but careful consideration must be placed into the selection
of agents for co-administration. Scientists have utilized enzyme
engineering coupled with high-throughput screening to discover
new enzymes as bioﬁlm-dispersing agents106,107,140,198.

In summary, the capability of traditional antibiotics has been
greatly compromised in recent years by increasing antibiotic
tolerance of bioﬁlm-embedded microbial pathogens. Clinically,
bioﬁlm-associated infections account for around 80% of human
infections. Thus, effective bioﬁlm dispersal strategies
bacterial
have been extensively sought after, and enzymatic dispersal
stands out from other bioﬁlm degrading methods due to its
efﬁciency and speciﬁcity without causing selective pressure on
bacteria. Bioﬁlm-dispersing enzymes can effectively break down
leading to a collapse of bioﬁlm matrices and making
the EPS,
microbial cells accessible to antibiotic treatments or host immune
responses. In this review, we have summarized the three major
families of bioﬁlm dispersal enzymes; glycosidases, proteases, and
deoxyribonucleases; which target bioﬁlm exopolysaccharides,
extracellular proteins, and eDNA, respectively. Although numerous
enzymes with bioﬁlm-dispersing abilities have been discovered
and demonstrate promising results in vitro, only a few in vivo
studies have been performed, with clinical trials conducted for
even less enzymes. Issues like toxicity, compatibility, and stability
of bioﬁlm-degrading enzymes have not yet been fully addressed.
Further efforts are needed to develop robust, safe, and potent
bioﬁlm-dispersing enzymes for clinical applications.

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

 
Received: 20 April 2023; Accepted: 15 August 2023;

REFERENCES

1. Joo, H. S. & Otto, M. Molecular basis of in vivo bioﬁlm formation by bacterial

pathogens. Chem. Biol. 19, 1503–1513 (2012).

2. Taylor, P. K., Van Kessel, A. T. M., Colavita, A., Hancock, R. E. W. & Mah, T. F. A
novel small RNA is important for bioﬁlm formation and pathogenicity in Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa. PLoS ONE 12, e0182582 (2017).

3. Das, T., Kutty, S. K., Kumar, N. & Maneﬁeld, M. Pyocyanin facilitates extracellular
DNA binding to Pseudomonas aeruginosa inﬂuencing cell surface properties
and aggregation. PLoS ONE 8, e58299 (2013).

4. Flemming, H. C., Neu, T. R. & Wozniak, D. J. The EPS matrix: the “house of bioﬁlm

cells”. J. Bacteriol. 189, 7945–7947 (2007).

5. Schachter, B. Slimy business—the biotechnology of bioﬁlms. Nat. Biotechnol. 21,

361–365 (2003).

S. Wang et al.

11

31. Yoon, B. K., Jackman, J. A., Valle-Gonzalez, E. R. & Cho, N. J. Antibacterial free fatty
acids and monoglycerides: biological activities, experimental testing, and ther-
apeutic applications. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 19, 1114 (2018).

32. Arciola, C. R., Campoccia, D., Speziale, P., Montanaro, L. & Costerton, J. W. Bioﬁlm
formation in Staphylococcus implant
infections. A review of molecular
mechanisms and implications for bioﬁlm-resistant materials. Biomaterials 33,
5967–5982 (2012).

33. Katsikogianni, M. & Missirlis, Y. F. Concise review of mechanisms of bacterial
adhesion to biomaterials and of techniques used in estimating bacteria-material
interactions. Eur. Cell Mater. 8, 37–57 (2004).

34. Russell, A. D. Biocide use and antibiotic resistance: the relevance of laboratory
ﬁndings to clinical and environmental situations. Lancet Infect. Dis. 3, 794–803
(2003).

35. Barraud, N. et al. Involvement of nitric oxide in bioﬁlm dispersal of Pseudo-

monas aeruginosa. J. Bacteriol. 188, 7344–7353 (2006).

36. Barraud, N., Kelso, M. J., Rice, S. A. & Kjelleberg, S. Nitric oxide: a key mediator of
bioﬁlm dispersal with applications in infectious diseases. Curr. Pharm. Des. 21,
31–42 (2015).

37. Brackman, G. & Coenye, T. Quorum sensing inhibitors as anti-bioﬁlm agents.

6. Nadell, C. D., Xavier, J. B., Levin, S. A. & Foster, K. R. The evolution of quorum

Curr. Pharm. Des. 21, 5–11 (2015).

sensing in bacterial bioﬁlms. PLoS Biol. 6, e14 (2008).

7. Davies, D. Understanding bioﬁlm resistance to antibacterial agents. Nat. Rev.

Drug Discov. 2, 114–122 (2003).

8. Machado, D., Castro, J., Palmeira-de-Oliveira, A., Martinez-de-Oliveira, J. & Cerca,
N. Bacterial vaginosis bioﬁlms: challenges to current therapies and emerging
solutions. Front. Microbiol. 6, 1528 (2015).

9. von Rosenvinge, E. C., O’May, G. A., Macfarlane, S., Macfarlane, G. T. & Shirtliff, M.
E. Microbial bioﬁlms and gastrointestinal diseases. Pathog. Dis. 67, 25–38 (2013).
10. Behlau, I. & Gilmore, M. S. Microbial bioﬁlms in ophthalmology and infectious

disease. Arch. Ophthalmol. 126, 1572–1581 (2008).

38. Poulin, M. B. & Kuperman, L. L. Regulation of bioﬁlm exopolysaccharide pro-
duction by cyclic di-guanosine monophosphate. Front. Microbiol. 12, 730980
(2021).

39. Zhou, C. et al. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of DSTA4637A: a novel
THIOMAB antibody antibiotic conjugate against Staphylococcus aureus in mice.
MAbs 8, 1612–1619 (2016).

40. Buhmann, M. T. et al. Extraction of bioﬁlms from ureteral stents for quantiﬁca-
tion and cultivation-dependent and -independent analyses. Front. Microbiol. 9,
1470 (2018).

41. Kaplan, J. B. Bioﬁlm dispersal: mechanisms, clinical implications, and potential

11. Vieira Colombo, A. P. et al. Periodontal-disease-associated bioﬁlm: a reservoir for

therapeutic uses. J. Dent. Res. 89, 205–218 (2010).

pathogens of medical importance. Microb. Pathog. 94, 27–34 (2016).

12. Delcaru, C. et al. Microbial bioﬁlms in urinary tract infections and prostatitis:
etiology, pathogenicity, and combating strategies. Pathogens 5, https://doi.org/
10.3390/pathogens5040065 (2016).

13. Post, J. C. Direct evidence of bacterial bioﬁlms in otitis media. Laryngoscope 111,

2083–2094 (2001).

14. Francolini,

I. & Donelli, G. Prevention and control of bioﬁlm-based medical-

device-related infections. FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 59, 227–238 (2010).
15. Fisher, R. A., Gollan, B. & Helaine, S. Persistent bacterial infections and persister

cells. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 15, 453–464 (2017).

16. Sauer, K. et al. The bioﬁlm life cycle: expanding the conceptual model of bioﬁlm

formation. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 20, 608–620 (2022).

17. Arjes, H. A. et al. Three-dimensional bioﬁlm colony growth supports a mutualism
sharing. Elife 10, https://doi.org/10.7554/

involving matrix and nutrient
eLife.64145 (2021).

18. Cherny, K. E. & Sauer, K. Untethering and degradation of the polysaccharide
matrix are essential steps in the dispersion response of pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa bioﬁlms. J. Bacteriol. 202, https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00575-19 (2020).
19. Rumbaugh, K. P. & Sauer, K. Bioﬁlm dispersion. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 18, 571–586

(2020).

42. Snarr, B. D., Howell, P. L. & Sheppard, D. C. Hoisted by their own petard: do
microbial enzymes hold the solution to treating and preventing bioﬁlm infec-
tions? Future Microbiol. 13, 395–398 (2018).

43. Fleming, D. & Rumbaugh, K. P. Approaches to Dispersing Medical Bioﬁlms.
Microorganisms 5, https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms5020015 (2017).
Izano, E. A., Wang, H., Ragunath, C., Ramasubbu, N. & Kaplan, J. B. Detachment
and killing of Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans bioﬁlms by dispersin B
and SDS. J. Dent. Res. 86, 618–622 (2007).

44.

45. Fazekas, E., Kandra, L. & Gyemant, G. Model for beta-1,6-N-acetylglucosamine
oligomer hydrolysis catalysed by DispersinB, a bioﬁlm degrading enzyme. Car-
bohydr. Res. 363, 7–13 (2012).

46. Whitchurch, C. B., Tolker-Nielsen, T., Ragas, P. C. & Mattick, J. S. Extracellular DNA

required for bacterial bioﬁlm formation. Science 295, 1487 (2002).

47. Seper, A. et al. Extracellular nucleases and extracellular DNA play important
roles in Vibrio cholerae bioﬁlm formation. Mol. Microbiol. 82, 1015–1037
(2011).

48. Shaw, L., Golonka, E., Potempa, J. & Foster, S. J. The role and regulation of the
extracellular proteases of Staphylococcus aureus. Microbiology (Reading) 150,
217–228 (2004).

49. Marti, M. et al. Extracellular proteases inhibit protein-dependent bioﬁlm for-

20. Stewart, P. S. Antimicrobial tolerance in bioﬁlms. Microbiol. Spectr. 3, https://

mation in Staphylococcus aureus. Microbes Infect. 12, 55–64 (2010).

doi.org/10.1128/microbiolspec.MB-0010-2014 (2015).

21. Stewart, P. S. & Costerton, J. W. Antibiotic resistance of bacteria in bioﬁlms.

Lancet 358, 135–138 (2001).

22. Brown, M. R., Allison, D. G. & Gilbert, P. Resistance of bacterial bioﬁlms to anti-
biotics: a growth-rate related effect? J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 22, 777–780 (1988).
23. Singh, S., Singh, S. K., Chowdhury, I. & Singh, R. Understanding the mechanism
of bacterial bioﬁlms resistance to antimicrobial agents. Open Microbiol. J. 11,
53–62 (2017).

24. Wood, T. K., Knabel, S. J. & Kwan, B. W. Bacterial persister cell formation and

dormancy. Appl Environ. Microbiol. 79, 7116–7121 (2013).

25. Lewis, K. Persister cells and the riddle of bioﬁlm survival. Biochemistry (Mosc.) 70,

267–274 (2005).

26. Lewis, K. Persister cells. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 64, 357–372 (2010).
27. LaFleur, M. D., Kumamoto, C. A. & Lewis, K. Candida albicans bioﬁlms produce
antifungal-tolerant persister cells. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 50, 3839–3846
(2006).

28. Lewis, K. Riddle of bioﬁlm resistance. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45,

999–1007 (2001).

29. Baltzer, S. A. & Brown, M. H. Antimicrobial peptides: promising alternatives to
conventional antibiotics. J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 20, 228–235 (2011).
30. Mookherjee, N., Anderson, M. A., Haagsman, H. P. & Davidson, D. J. Antimicrobial
host defence peptides: functions and clinical potential. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 19,
311–332 (2020).

50. Ryder, C., Byrd, M. & Wozniak, D. J. Role of polysaccharides in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa bioﬁlm development. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 10, 644–648 (2007).
51. Ross, P., Mayer, R. & Benziman, M. Cellulose biosynthesis and function in bac-

teria. Microbiol. Rev. 55, 35–58 (1991).

52. Jackson, K. D., Starkey, M., Kremer, S., Parsek, M. R. & Wozniak, D. J. Identiﬁcation
of psl, a locus encoding a potential exopolysaccharide that is essential for
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 bioﬁlm formation. J. Bacteriol. 186, 4466–4475
(2004).

53. Friedman, L. & Kolter, R. Two genetic loci produce distinct carbohydrate-rich
structural components of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm matrix. J. Bac-
teriol. 186, 4457–4465 (2004).

54. Heilmann, C. et al. Molecular basis of intercellular adhesion in the bioﬁlm-
forming Staphylococcus epidermidis. Mol. Microbiol. 20, 1083–1091 (1996).
55. Rinehart, K. L. et al. Bioactive compounds from aquatic and terrestrial sources. J.

Nat. Prod. 53, 771–792 (1990).

56. Vocadlo, D. J. & Withers, S. G. Detailed comparative analysis of the catalytic
mechanisms of beta-N-acetylglucosaminidases from families 3 and 20 of gly-
coside hydrolases. Biochemistry 44, 12809–12818 (2005).

57. Wang, X., Preston, J. F. 3rd & Romeo, T. The pgaABCD locus of Escherichia coli
promotes the synthesis of a polysaccharide adhesin required for bioﬁlm for-
mation. J. Bacteriol. 186, 2724–2734 (2004).

58. Jarrett, C. O. et al. Transmission of Yersinia pestis from an infectious bioﬁlm in

the ﬂea vector. J. Infect. Dis. 190, 783–792 (2004).

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

 
12

S. Wang et al.

59.

60.

Izano, E. A. et al. Poly-N-acetylglucosamine mediates bioﬁlm formation and
antibiotic resistance in Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae. Microb. Pathog. 43,
1–9 (2007).
Izano, E. A. et al. Poly-N-acetylglucosamine mediates bioﬁlm formation and
detergent
resistance in Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans. Microb.
Pathog. 44, 52–60 (2008).

61. Parise, G., Mishra, M., Itoh, Y., Romeo, T. & Deora, R. Role of a putative polysaccharide

locus in Bordetella bioﬁlm development. J. Bacteriol. 189, 750–760 (2007).

62. Choi, A. H., Slamti, L., Avci, F. Y., Pier, G. B. & Maira-Litran, T. The pgaABCD locus
of Acinetobacter baumannii encodes the production of poly-beta-1-6-N-acet-
ylglucosamine, which is critical
J. Bacteriol. 191,
5953–5963 (2009).
63. Yakandawala, N.

the poly-beta-1,6-N-acet-
ylglucosamine polysaccharide component of Burkholderia bioﬁlms. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 77, 8303–8309 (2011).

for bioﬁlm formation.

al. Characterization of

et

64. Chen, K. M. et al. The role of pgaC in Klebsiella pneumoniae virulence and

bioﬁlm formation. Microb. Pathog. 77, 89–99 (2014).

65. Ye, L., Zheng, X. & Zheng, H. Effect of sypQ gene on poly-N-acetylglucosamine
biosynthesis in Vibrio parahaemolyticus and its role in infection process. Gly-
cobiol 24, 351–358 (2014).

66. Roux, D. et al.

Identiﬁcation of poly-N-acetylglucosamine as a major poly-
saccharide component of the bacillus subtilis bioﬁlm matrix. J. Biol. Chem. 290,
19261–19272 (2015).

67. Maira-Litran, T. et al. Immunochemical properties of the staphylococcal poly-N-
acetylglucosamine surface polysaccharide. Infect. Immun. 70, 4433–4440 (2002).
68. McKenney, D. et al. The ica locus of Staphylococcus epidermidis encodes produc-
tion of the capsular polysaccharide/adhesin. Infect. Immun. 66, 4711–4720 (1998).
69. Cramton, S. E., Gerke, C., Schnell, N. F., Nichols, W. W. & Gotz, F. The intercellular
adhesion (ica) locus is present in Staphylococcus aureus and is required for
bioﬁlm formation. Infect. Immun. 67, 5427–5433 (1999).

70. Little, D. J. et al. Structural basis for the De-N-acetylation of poly-beta-1,6-N-
acetyl-D-glucosamine in Gram-positive bacteria. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 35907–35917
(2014).

71. Atkin, K. E., MacDonald, S. J., Brentnall, A. S., Potts, J. R. & Thomas, G. H. A
different path: revealing the function of staphylococcal proteins in bioﬁlm for-
mation. FEBS Lett. 588, 1869–1872 (2014).

72. Nishiyama, T., Noguchi, H., Yoshida, H., Park, S. Y. & Tame, J. R. The structure of
the deacetylase domain of Escherichia coli PgaB, an enzyme required for bioﬁlm
formation: a circularly permuted member of the carbohydrate esterase 4 family.
Acta Crystallogr. D: Biol. Crystallogr. 69, 44–51 (2013).

73. Franklin, M. J., Nivens, D. E., Weadge, J. T. & Howell, P. L. Biosynthesis of the
Pseudomonas aeruginosa extracellular polysaccharides, alginate, Pel, and Psl.
Front. Microbiol. 2, 167 (2011).

74. Stover, C. K. et al. Complete genome sequence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa

PAO1, an opportunistic pathogen. Nature 406, 959–964 (2000).

75. Zielinski, N. A., Chakrabarty, A. M. & Berry, A. Characterization and regulation of
the Pseudomonas aeruginosa algC gene encoding phosphomannomutase. J.
Biol. Chem. 266, 9754–9763 (1991).

76. Baker, P. et al. P. aeruginosa SGNH hydrolase-like proteins AlgJ and AlgX have
similar topology but separate and distinct roles in alginate acetylation. PLoS
Pathog. 10, e1004334 (2014).

77. Gheorghita, A. A. et al. Structure of the AlgKX modiﬁcation and secretion
complex required for alginate production and bioﬁlm attachment in Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa. Nat. Commun. 13, 7631 (2022).

78. Wolfram, F. et al. Catalytic mechanism and mode of action of the periplasmic

alginate epimerase AlgG. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 6006–6019 (2014).

79. Blasi, P. et al. Preparation and in vitro and in vivo characterization of composite

microcapsules for cell encapsulation. Int J. Pharm. 324, 27–36 (2006).

80. Colvin, K. M. et al. The Pel and Psl polysaccharides provide Pseudomonas aer-
uginosa structural redundancy within the bioﬁlm matrix. Environ. Microbiol 14,
1913–1928 (2012).

81. Whitﬁeld, G. B. & Howell, P. L. The matrix revisited: opening night for the pel
14,

kingdoms. Microbiol

eubacterial

Insights

across

polysaccharide
1178636120988588 (2021).

82. Le Mauff, F. et al. The Pel polysaccharide is predominantly composed of a
dimeric repeat of alpha-1,4 linked galactosamine and N-acetylgalactosamine.
Commun. Biol. 5, 502 (2022).

83. Whitﬁeld, G. B. et al. Pel polysaccharide biosynthesis requires an inner mem-
brane complex comprised of PelD, PelE, PelF, and PelG. J. Bacteriol. 202, https://
doi.org/10.1128/JB.00684-19 (2020).

84. Whitﬁeld, G. B. et al. Discovery and characterization of a Gram-positive Pel
polysaccharide biosynthetic gene cluster. PLoS Pathog. 16, e1008281 (2020).
85. Bundalovic-Torma, C., Whitﬁeld, G. B., Marmont, L. S., Howell, P. L. & Parkinson, J.
A systematic pipeline for classifying bacterial operons reveals the evolutionary
landscape of bioﬁlm machineries. PLoS Comput. Biol. 16, e1007721 (2020).

86. Friedman, L. & Kolter, R. Genes involved in matrix formation in Pseudomonas

aeruginosa PA14 bioﬁlms. Mol. Microbiol. 51, 675–690 (2004).

87. Colvin, K. M. et al. PelA deacetylase activity is required for Pel polysaccharide
synthesis in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Bacteriol. 195, 2329–2339 (2013).
88. Champion, A. E., Catanzaro, K. C. F., Bandara, A. B. & Inzana, T. J. Formation of the
Francisella tularensis bioﬁlm is affected by cell surface glycosylation, growth
medium, and a glucan exopolysaccharide. Sci. Rep. 9, 12252 (2019).

89. Petruzzi, B. et al. Capsular polysaccharide interferes with bioﬁlm formation by
Pasteurella multocida Serogroup A. mBio 8, https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.01843-17
(2017).

90. Matthysse, A. G., Thomas, D. L. & White, A. R. Mechanism of cellulose synthesis in

Agrobacterium tumefaciens. J. Bacteriol. 177, 1076–1081 (1995).

91. Zogaj, X., Nimtz, M., Rohde, M., Bokranz, W. & Romling, U. The multicellular
morphotypes of Salmonella typhimurium and Escherichia coli produce cellulose
as the second component of the extracellular matrix. Mol. Microbiol. 39,
1452–1463 (2001).

92. Gal, M., Preston, G. M., Massey, R. C., Spiers, A. J. & Rainey, P. B. Genes encoding a
cellulosic polymer contribute toward the ecological success of Pseudomonas
ﬂuorescens SBW25 on plant surfaces. Mol. Ecol. 12, 3109–3121 (2003).

93. Romling, U. & Galperin, M. Y. Bacterial cellulose biosynthesis: diversity of
operons, subunits, products, and functions. Trends Microbiol. 23, 545–557
(2015).

94. Shen, T. & Gnanakaran, S. The stability of cellulose: a statistical perspective from
a coarse-grained model of hydrogen-bond networks. Biophys. J. 96, 3032–3040
(2009).

95. Thongsomboon, W. et al. Phosphoethanolamine cellulose: a naturally produced

chemically modiﬁed cellulose. Science 359, 334–338 (2018).

96. Fontaine, T. et al. Galactosaminogalactan, a new immunosuppressive poly-

saccharide of Aspergillus fumigatus. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002372 (2011).

97. Lee, M. J. et al. Deacetylation of fungal exopolysaccharide mediates adhesion

and bioﬁlm formation. mBio 7, e00252–00216 (2016).

98. Bamford, N. C. et al. Structural and biochemical characterization of the exopo-
lysaccharide deacetylase Agd3 required for Aspergillus fumigatus bioﬁlm for-
mation. Nat. Commun. 11, 2450 (2020).

99. Matyjaszewski, K. & Möller, M. Polymer science: a comprehensive reference.

Chapter 2, 111–184 (2012).

100. Douglas, C. Fungal β (1, 3)-D-glucan synthesis. Sabouraudia 39, 55–66 (2001).
101. Tan, Y., Ma, S., Leonhard, M., Moser, D. & Schneider-Stickler, B. beta-1,3-gluca-
nase disrupts bioﬁlm formation and increases antifungal susceptibility of Can-
dida albicans DAY185. Int J. Biol. Macromol. 108, 942–946 (2018).

102. Oner, E. T., Hernandez, L. & Combie, J. Review of Levan polysaccharide: from a
century of past experiences to future prospects. Biotechnol. Adv. 34, 827–844
(2016).

103. Han, Y. W. Microbial levan. Adv. Appl. Microbiol. 35, 171–194 (1990).
104. Zhang, W. et al. An overview of levan-degrading enzyme from microbes. Appl.

Microbiol. Biotechnol. 103, 7891–7902 (2019).

105. Dedonder, R. In Methods in Enzymology Vol. 8, 500–505 (Elsevier, 1966). https://

www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0076687966080911.

106. Wang, S., Breslawec, A. P., Li, C. & Poulin, M. B. A colorimetric assay to enable
identiﬁcation of bioﬁlm exopolysaccharide-hydrolyzing

high-throughput
enzymes. Chemistry 26, 10719–10723 (2020).

107. Wang, S., Breslawec, A. P. & Poulin, M. B. Multifunctional ﬂuorescent probes for
high-throughput characterization of hexosaminidase enzyme activity. Bioorg.
Chem. 119, 105532 (2022).

108. Redman, W. K. et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of bioﬁlm dispersal by glycoside

hydrolases in wounds. Bioﬁlm 3, 100061 (2021).

109. Kaplan, J. B., Ragunath, C., Ramasubbu, N. & Fine, D. H. Detachment of Actino-
bacillus actinomycetemcomitans bioﬁlm cells by an endogenous beta-
hexosaminidase activity. J. Bacteriol. 185, 4693–4698 (2003).

110. Kerrigan, J. E. et al. Modeling and biochemical analysis of the activity of anti-

bioﬁlm agent Dispersin B. Acta Biol. Hung. 59, 439–451 (2008).

111. Wang, S. et al. Differential recognition of deacetylated PNAG oligosaccharides
by a bioﬁlm degrading glycosidase. ACS Chem. Biol. 14, 1998–2005 (2019).
112. Breslawec, A. P., Wang, S., Monahan, K. N., Barry, L. L. & Poulin, M. B. The
endoglycosidase activity of Dispersin B is mediated through electrostatic
interactions with cationic poly-beta-(1–>6)-N-acetylglucosamine. FEBS J. 290,
1049–1059 (2023).

113. Manuel, S. G. et al. Role of active-site residues of dispersin B, a bioﬁlm-releasing
beta-hexosaminidase from a periodontal pathogen, in substrate hydrolysis. FEBS
J. 274, 5987–5999 (2007).

114. Gawande, P. V. et al. Antibioﬁlm efﬁcacy of DispersinB((R)) wound spray used in
combination with a silver wound dressing. Microbiol Insights 7, 9–13 (2014).
115. Breslawec, A. P., Wang, S., Li, C. & Poulin, M. B. Anionic amino acids support
hydrolysis of poly-beta-(1,6)-N-acetylglucosamine exopolysaccharides by the
bioﬁlm dispersing glycosidase Dispersin B. J. Biol. Chem. 296, 100203 (2021).

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

 
116. Little, D. J. et al. PgaB orthologues contain a glycoside hydrolase domain that
cleaves deacetylated poly-beta(1,6)-N-acetylglucosamine and can disrupt bac-
terial bioﬁlms. PLoS Pathog. 14, e1006998 (2018).

117. Forman, A., Pfoh, R., Eddenden, A., Howell, P. L. & Nitz, M. Synthesis of deﬁned
mono-de-N-acetylated beta-(1–>6)-N-acetyl-d-glucosamine oligosaccharides to
characterize PgaB hydrolase activity. Org. Biomol. Chem. 17, 9456–9466 (2019).
118. Little, D. J. et al. Modiﬁcation and periplasmic translocation of the bioﬁlm
exopolysaccharide poly-beta-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 111, 11013–11018 (2014).

119. Blanco-Cabra, N. et al. Characterization of different alginate lyases for dissolving

Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlms. Sci. Rep. 10, 9390 (2020).

120. Zhu, B. & Yin, H. Alginate lyase: Review of major sources and classiﬁcation,
structure-function analysis and applications. Bioengineered 6,

properties,
125–131 (2015).

121. Jang, C. H. et al. Modeling and re-engineering of azotobacter vinelandii alginate
lyase to enhance its catalytic efﬁciency for accelerating bioﬁlm degradation.
PLoS ONE 11, e0156197 (2016).

122. Daboor, S. M., Raudonis, R. & Cheng, Z. Characterizations of the viability and
gene expression of dispersal cells from Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlms
released by alginate lyase and tobramycin. PLoS ONE 16, e0258950 (2021).
123. Baker, P. et al. Characterization of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa glycoside
hydrolase PslG reveals that its levels are critical for Psl polysaccharide bio-
synthesis and bioﬁlm formation. J. Biol. Chem. 290, 28374–28387 (2015).
124. Baker, P. et al. Exopolysaccharide biosynthetic glycoside hydrolases can be
utilized to disrupt and prevent Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlms. Sci. Adv. 2,
e1501632 (2016).

125. Paul, J. S., Gupta, N., Beliya, E., Tiwari, S. & Jadhav, S. K. Aspects and recent trends
in microbial alpha-amylase: a review. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 193, 2649–2698
(2021).

126. Craigen, B., Dashiff, A. & Kadouri, D. E. The use of commercially available alpha-
amylase compounds to inhibit and remove Staphylococcus aureus bioﬁlms.
Open Microbiol J. 5, 21–31 (2011).

127. Karatan, E. & Watnick, P. Signals, regulatory networks, and materials that build
and break bacterial bioﬁlms. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 73, 310–347 (2009).
128. Loiselle, M. & Anderson, K. W. The use of cellulase in inhibiting bioﬁlm formation
from organisms commonly found on medical implants. Biofouling 19, 77–85
(2003).

129. Kamali, E., Jamali, A., Izanloo, A. & Ardebili, A. In vitro activities of cellulase and
ceftazidime, alone and in combination against Pseudomonas aeruginosa bio-
ﬁlms. BMC Microbiol. 21, 347 (2021).

130. Zhang, Z., Liao, H., Yang, M., Hu, C. & Du, Y. [Levoﬂoxacin combined with cel-
lulase can eradicate bacille Calmette-Guerin bioﬁlm infection]. Nan Fang Yi Ke
Da Xue Xue Bao 43, 257–264 (2023).

131. Bamford, N. C. et al. Sph3 is a glycoside hydrolase required for the biosynthesis
J. Biol. Chem. 290,

fumigatus.

of galactosaminogalactan in Aspergillus
27438–27450 (2015).

132. Le Mauff, F. et al. Molecular mechanism of Aspergillus fumigatus bioﬁlm dis-
ruption by fungal and bacterial glycoside hydrolases. J. Biol. Chem. 294,
10760–10772 (2019).

133. Bamford, N. C. et al. Ega3 from the fungal pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus is an
endo-alpha-1,4-galactosaminidase that disrupts microbial bioﬁlms. J. Biol. Chem.
294, 13833–13849 (2019).

134. Balasubramanian, V., Vashisht, D., Cletus, J. & Sakthivel, N. Plant beta-1,3-glu-
canases: their biological functions and transgenic expression against phyto-
pathogenic fungi. Biotechnol. Lett. 34, 1983–1990 (2012).

135. Wanker, E., Huber, A. & Schwab, H. Puriﬁcation and characterization of the
Bacillus subtilis levanase produced in Escherichia coli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
61, 1953–1958 (1995).

136. Shida, T., Mukaijo, K., Ishikawa, S., Yamamoto, H. & Sekiguchi, J. Production of
long-chain levan by a sacC insertional mutant from Bacillus subtilis 327UH.
Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 66, 1555–1558 (2002).

137. Trizna, E., Bogachev, M. I. & Kayumov, A. Degrading of the Pseudomonas aer-
uginosa bioﬁlm by extracellular levanase SacC from Bacillus subtilis. BioNa-
noScience 9, 48–52 (2019).

S. Wang et al.

13

143. Ebeling, W. et al. Proteinase K from Tritirachium album Limber. Eur. J. Biochem.

47, 91–97 (1974).

144. Kumar Shukla, S. & Rao, T. S. Dispersal of Bap-mediated Staphylococcus aureus

bioﬁlm by proteinase K. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 66, 55–60 (2013).

145. Nguyen, U. T. & Burrows, L. L. DNase I and proteinase K impair Listeria mono-
cytogenes bioﬁlm formation and induce dispersal of pre-existing bioﬁlms. Int J.
Food Microbiol. 187, 26–32 (2014).

146. Cui, H., Ma, C. & Lin, L. Co-loaded proteinase K/thyme oil liposomes for inacti-
vation of Escherichia coli O157:H7 bioﬁlms on cucumber. Food Funct. 7,
4030–4040 (2016).

147. Richert, A. & Dabrowska, G. B. Enzymatic degradation and bioﬁlm formation
during biodegradation of polylactide and polycaprolactone polymers in various
environments. Int J. Biol. Macromol. 176, 226–232 (2021).

148. Radwan, A. A., Darwesh, O. M., Emam, M. T., Mohamed, K. A. & Shady, H. M. A.
A combined treatment of Proteinase K and biosynthesized ZnO-NPs for
eradication of dairy bioﬁlm of sporeformers. AIMS Microbiol. 8, 507–527
(2022).

149. Hu, W. S., Min Nam, D., Kim, J. S. & Koo, O. K. Synergistic anti-bioﬁlm effects of
Brassicaceae plant extracts in combination with proteinase K against Escherichia
coli O157:H7. Sci. Rep. 10, 21090 (2020).

150. Thomas, R. E. & Thomas, B. C. Reducing bioﬁlm infections in burn patients’
wounds and bioﬁlms on surfaces in hospitals, medical facilities and medical
equipment to improve burn care: a systematic review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public
Health 18, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182413195 (2021).

151. Mugita, N., Nambu, T., Takahashi, K., Wang, P. L. & Komasa, Y. Proteases, acti-
nidin, papain and trypsin reduce oral bioﬁlm on the tongue in elderly subjects
and in vitro. Arch. Oral. Biol. 82, 233–240 (2017).

152. Banar, M. et al. Evaluation of mannosidase and trypsin enzymes effects on
bioﬁlm production of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolated from burn wound
infections. PLoS ONE 11, e0164622 (2016).

153. Zhou, J. et al. An in vitro study on the degradation of multispecies bioﬁlm of
periodontitis-related microorganisms by bovine trypsin. Front. Microbiol. 13,
951291 (2022).

154. Mechmechani, S. et al. Pepsin and trypsin treatment combined with carvacrol:
an efﬁcient strategy to ﬁght Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterococcus fae-
calis bioﬁlms. Microorganisms 11, 143 (2023).

155. Hamuro, Y., Coales, S. J., Molnar, K. S., Tuske, S. J. & Morrow, J. A. Speciﬁcity of
immobilized porcine pepsin in H/D exchange compatible conditions. Rapid
Commun. Mass Spectrom. 22, 1041–1046 (2008).

156. Mechmechani, S. et al. Hurdle technology based on the use of micro-
encapsulated pepsin, trypsin and carvacrol to eradicate Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa and Enterococcus faecalis bioﬁlms. Biofouling 38, 903–915 (2022).

157. Potempa, J. & Shaw, L. N.

In Handbook of Proteolytic Enzymes 3rd edn (eds

Rawlings, N. D. & Guy, S.) 563-569 (Academic Press, 2013).

158. Laarman, A. J. et al. Staphylococcus aureus metalloprotease aureolysin cleaves
Immunol. 186, 6445–6453

complement C3 to mediate immune evasion. J.
(2011).

159. Pietrocola, G., Nobile, G., Rindi, S. & Speziale, P. Staphylococcus aureus manip-
ulates innate immunity through own and host-expressed proteases. Front. Cell
Infect. Microbiol. 7, 166 (2017).

160. Loughran, A. J. et al. Impact of individual extracellular proteases on Staphylo-
coccus aureus bioﬁlm formation in diverse clinical isolates and their isogenic
sarA mutants. Microbiologyopen 3, 897–909 (2014).

161. Chen, C. et al. Secreted proteases control autolysin-mediated bioﬁlm growth of

Staphylococcus aureus. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 29440–29452 (2013).

162. Barrett, A., Rawlings, N. & Woessner, J. Handbook of Proteolytic Enzymes (Aca-

demic Press, 1998).

163. Mootz, J. M., Malone, C. L., Shaw, L. N. & Horswill, A. R. Staphopains modulate
Staphylococcus aureus bioﬁlm integrity. Infect. Immun. 81, 3227–3238 (2013).
164. Yamasaki, K. et al. Increased serine protease activity and cathelicidin promotes

skin inﬂammation in rosacea. Nat. Med. 13, 975–980 (2007).

165. Sonesson, A. et al. Identiﬁcation of bacterial bioﬁlm and the Staphylococcus
aureus derived protease, staphopain, on the skin surface of patients with atopic
dermatitis. Sci. Rep. 7, 1–12 (2017).

138. Liu, Y. et al. Synergistic effect between the recombinant exo-inulinase and endo-
inulinase on inulin hydrolysis. J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym. 128, 27–38 (2016).
139. Liu, G.-L., Chi, Z. & Chi, Z.-M. Molecular characterization and expression of

166. Paharik, A. E. et al. The Spl serine proteases modulate staphylococcus aureus
protein production and virulence in a rabbit model of pneumonia. mSphere 1,
https://doi.org/10.1128/mSphere.00208-16 (2016).

microbial inulinase genes. Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 39, 152–165 (2013).

140. Møllebjerg, A. et al. Novel high-throughput screening platform identiﬁes
enzymes to tackle biofouling on reverse osmosis membranes. Desalination 554,
116485 (2023).

141. Alav, I., Sutton, J. M. & Rahman, K. M. Role of bacterial efﬂux pumps in bioﬁlm

167. Boles, B. R. & Horswill, A. R. Agr-mediated dispersal of Staphylococcus aureus

bioﬁlms. PLoS Pathog. 4, e1000052 (2008).

168. Lee, S. F., Li, Y. H. & Bowden, G. H. Detachment of Streptococcus mutans
Immun. 64,

bioﬁlm cells by an endogenous enzymatic activity.
1035–1038 (1996).

Infect.

formation. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 73, 2003–2020 (2018).

169. Lee, S. F.

142. Erskine, E., MacPhee, C. E. & Stanley-Wall, N. R. Functional amyloid and other
protein ﬁbers in the bioﬁlm matrix. J. Mol. Biol. 430, 3642–3656 (2018).

Identiﬁcation and characterization of a surface protein-releasing
Infect.

activity in Streptococcus mutans and other pathogenic streptococci.
Immun. 60, 4032–4039 (1992).

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

 
14

S. Wang et al.

170. Nelson, D. C., Garbe, J. & Collin, M. Cysteine proteinase SpeB from Streptococcus
pyogenes—a potent modiﬁer of immunologically important host and bacterial
proteins. Biol. Chem. 392, 1077–1088 (2011).

171. Roberts, A. L., Holder, R. C. & Reid, S. D. Allelic replacement of the streptococcal
cysteine protease SpeB in a Δ srv mutant background restores bioﬁlm forma-
tion. BMC Res. Notes 3, 1–7 (2010).

172. Connolly, K. L., Roberts, A. L., Holder, R. C. & Reid, S. D. Dispersal of Group A
streptococcal bioﬁlms by the cysteine protease SpeB leads to increased disease
severity in a murine model. PLoS ONE 6, e18984 (2011).

173. Carothers, K. E. et al. The streptococcal protease SpeB antagonizes the bio-
ﬁlms of the human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus USA300 through clea-
vage of the staphylococcal SdrC protein. J. Bacteriol. 202, e00008–e00020
(2020).

174. Saggu, S. K., Jha, G. & Mishra, P. C. Enzymatic degradation of bioﬁlm by
metalloprotease from microbacterium sp. SKS10. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 7,
192 (2019).

175. Panlilio, H. & Rice, C. V. The role of extracellular DNA in the formation, archi-
tecture, stability, and treatment of bacterial bioﬁlms. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 118,
2129–2141 (2021).

176. Okshevsky, M. & Meyer, R. L. The role of extracellular DNA in the establishment,
maintenance and perpetuation of bacterial bioﬁlms. Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 41,
341–352 (2015).

177. Alhede, M., Bjarnsholt, T., Givskov, M. & Alhede, M. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
bioﬁlms: mechanisms of immune evasion. Adv. Appl. Microbiol. 86, 1–40
(2014).

178. Baranovskii, A. G., Buneva, V. N. & Nevinsky, G. A. Human deoxyribonucleases.

Biochemistry (Mosc.) 69, 587–601 (2004).

179. Sharma, K. & Pagedar Singh, A. Antibioﬁlm effect of DNase against single and

mixed species bioﬁlm. Foods 7, https://doi.org/10.3390/foods7030042 (2018).

180. Tetz, V. V. & Tetz, G. V. Effect of extracellular DNA destruction by DNase I on

characteristics of forming bioﬁlms. DNA Cell Biol. 29, 399–405 (2010).

181. Wagener, J. S. & Kupfer, O. Dornase alfa (Pulmozyme). Curr. Opin. Pulm. Med. 18,

609–614 (2012).

182. Kaplan, J. B. et al. Recombinant human DNase I decreases bioﬁlm and
increases antimicrobial susceptibility in staphylococci. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 65,
73–77 (2012).

183. Pakkulnan, R., Thonglao, N. & Chareonsudjai, S. DNase I and chitosan enhance
efﬁcacy of ceftazidime to eradicate Burkholderia pseudomallei bioﬁlm cells. Sci.
Rep. 13, 1059 (2023).

184. Fang, J. Y. et al. Facile bioﬁlm penetration of cationic liposomes loaded with
DNase I/Proteinase K to eradicate cutibacterium acnes for treating cutaneous
and catheter infections. Int. J. Nanomed. 16, 8121–8138 (2021).

185. Patel, K. K. et al. Antibioﬁlm potential of silver sulfadiazine-loaded nanoparticle
formulations: a study on the effect of DNase-I on microbial bioﬁlm and wound
healing activity. Mol. Pharm. 16, 3916–3925 (2019).

186. Eckhart, L., Fischer, H., Barken, K. B., Tolker-Nielsen, T. & Tschachler, E.
DNase1L2 suppresses bioﬁlm formation by Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Sta-
phylococcus aureus. Br. J. Dermatol. 156, 1342–1345 (2007).

187. Focareta, T. & Manning, P. A. Distinguishing between the extracellular DNases of
Vibrio cholerae and development of a transformation system. Mol. Microbiol. 5,
2547–2555 (1991).

188. Dlakic, M. Functionally unrelated signalling proteins contain a fold similar to
Mg2+-dependent endonucleases. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25, 272–273 (2000).
189. Niiranen, L. et al. Effects of salt on the kinetics and thermodynamic stability of
endonuclease I from Vibrio salmonicida and Vibrio cholerae. FEBS J. 275,
1593–1605 (2008).

190. Tang, Y.-W., Liu, D., Sussman, M., Poxton, I. & Schwartzman, J. Molecular Medical

Microbiology (Academic Press, 2014).

192. Basle, A. et al. Crystal structure of NucB, a bioﬁlm-degrading endonuclease.

Nucleic Acids Res. 46, 473–484 (2018).

193. Shields, R. C. et al. Efﬁcacy of a marine bacterial nuclease against bioﬁlm forming
microorganisms isolated from chronic rhinosinusitis. PLoS ONE 8, e55339 (2013).
194. Fanaei Pirlar, R. et al. Combinatorial effects of antibiotics and enzymes against
dual-species Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlms in
the wound-like medium. PLoS ONE 15, e0235093 (2020).

195. Rosman, C. W. K., van der Mei, H. C. & Sjollema, J. Inﬂuence of sub-inhibitory
concentrations of antimicrobials on micrococcal nuclease and bioﬁlm formation
in Staphylococcus aureus. Sci. Rep. 11, 13241 (2021).

196. Thapa, S. et al. Biochemical characteristics of microbial enzymes and their

signiﬁcance from industrial perspectives. Mol. Biotechnol. 61, 579–601 (2019).

197. Borooah, J., Leaback, D. H. & Walker, P. G. Studies on glucosaminidase. 2. Sub-
strates for N-acetyl-β-glucosaminidase*. Biochem. J. 78, 106–110 (1961).
198. Ngara, T. R. & Zhang, H. Recent advances in function-based metagenomic

screening. Genomics Proteom. Bioinform. 16, 405–415 (2018).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by Henan Province in 2023 Key scientiﬁc research project
plan of colleges and universities (Grant No. 23A310029) to Dr. Shaochi Wang.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.W., L.L.K., and Q.Y. took the lead in writing the manuscript. A.P.B., Y.Z., and Z.D.
provided critical feedback and helped shape the manuscript. T.L. helped revise the
manuscript.

COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Laura L.
Kuperman or Qiuning Yu.

Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of
license, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

this

191. Nemoto, K. et al. Effect of Varidase (streptodornase) on bioﬁlm formed by

Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Chemotherapy 49, 121–125 (2003).

© The Author(s) 2023

npj Bioﬁlms and Microbiomes (2023)  

 63 

Published in partnership with Nanyang Technological University

 
