Review
Microbial Bioﬁlms in the Food Industry—A
Comprehensive Review

Conrado Carrascosa 1,*, Dele Raheem 2

, Fernando Ramos 3,4

, Ariana Saraiva 1 and António Raposo 5,*

1 Department of Animal Pathology and Production, Bromatology and Food Technology, Faculty of Veterinary,
Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Trasmontaña s/n, 35413 Arucas, Spain; ariana_23@outlook.pt

2 Northern Institute for Environmental and Minority Law (NIEM), Arctic Centre, University of Lapland,

3

96101 Rovaniemi, Finland; braheem@ulapland.ﬁ
Pharmacy Faculty, University of Coimbra, Azinhaga de Santa Comba, 3000-548 Coimbra, Portugal;
framos@ff.uc.pt

4 REQUIMTE/LAQV, R. D. Manuel II, Apartado 55142 Oporto, Portugal
5 CBIOS (Research Center for Biosciences and Health Technologies), Universidade Lusófona de Humanidades

e Tecnologias, Campo Grande 376, 1749-024 Lisboa, Portugal

* Correspondence: conrado.carrascosa@ulpgc.es (C.C.); antonio.raposo@ulusofona.pt (A.R.)

Abstract: Bioﬁlms, present as microorganisms and surviving on surfaces, can increase food cross-
contamination, leading to changes in the food industry’s cleaning and disinfection dynamics. Bioﬁlm
is an association of microorganisms that is irreversibly linked with a surface, contained in an ex-
tracellular polymeric substance matrix, which poses a formidable challenge for food industries. To
avoid bioﬁlms from forming, and to eliminate them from reversible attachment and irreversible
stages, where attached microorganisms improve surface adhesion, a strong disinfectant is required
to eliminate bacterial attachments. This review paper tackles bioﬁlm problems from all perspec-
tives, including bioﬁlm-forming pathogens in the food industry, disinfectant resistance of bioﬁlm,
and identiﬁcation methods. As bioﬁlms are largely responsible for food spoilage and outbreaks,
they are also considered responsible for damage to food processing equipment. Hence the need to
gain good knowledge about all of the factors favouring their development or growth, such as the
attachment surface, food matrix components, environmental conditions, the bacterial cells involved,
and electrostatic charging of surfaces. Overall, this review study shows the real threat of bioﬁlms
in the food industry due to the resistance of disinfectants and the mechanisms developed for their
survival, including the intercellular signalling system, the cyclic nucleotide second messenger, and
bioﬁlm-associated proteins.

Keywords: bioﬁlms; food industry; food microbiology; food safety

Citation: Carrascosa, C.; Raheem, D.;

Ramos, F.; Saraiva, A.; Raposo, A.

Microbial Bioﬁlms in the Food

Industry—A Comprehensive Review.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021,

18, 2014. https://doi.org/10.3390/

ijerph18042014

Academic Editor: Paul B. Tchounwou

Received: 26 December 2020

Accepted: 7 February 2021

Published: 19 February 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

1. Introduction

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

iations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Typically, bacteria bind to surfaces and form spatially structured communities inside
a self-produced matrix, which consist of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) known
as bioﬁlms [1,2]. Bioﬁlms imply major challenges for the food industry because they allow
bacteria to bind to a range of surfaces, including rubber, polypropylene, plastic, glass,
stainless steel, and even food products, within just a few minutes, which is followed by
mature bioﬁlms developing within a few days (or even hours) [3].

Since ancient times, this sessile life form has been followed as an excellent survival
technique for microorganisms, given the protective barrier generated and physiological
changes made by the bioﬁlm matrix, while it ﬁghts against the adverse environmental
circumstances faced typically by bacteria in man-made and natural settings, even in food-
processing facilities [4,5]. Hence, bioﬁlms are believed responsible for damaged equipment,
more expensive energy costs, outbreaks, and food spoilage [5–8]. Bioﬁlms have become
more robust to disinfections in many wide-ranging food industries, such as processing

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18042014

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph

International Journal ofEnvironmental Researchand Public Health(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

2 of 31

seafood, brewing, dairy processing, and meat and poultry processing [9] There is com-
pelling evidence for bioﬁlm lifestyle making them more resilient to antimicrobial agents,
particularly compared to planktonic cells (Figures 1 and 2). This entails having to remove
them from surfaces of food processing plants, which poses a massive task [10–12].

Figure 1. Bioﬁlm formation and development stages.

Microbiological surface management is relevant for assessing and making decisions
as to whether residual microbial species are found at a suitable level, and if harmful
microorganisms are removed. The obtained results will allow criteria to be set, such as
how to clean surfaces and food product quality [13,14].

Sensory tests that involve visually inspecting surfaces with good lighting, smelling
unpleasant odours, and feeling encrusted or greasy surfaces are run as a process regulation
to instantly overcome visible sanitation defects, while microbiological evaluations are often
made to guarantee consistency with microbial standards and to make improvements to
sanitation procedures [15]. The fact that visual inspection cannot coincide with bacterial
counts has been well-documented [16]. The hygienic conditions of food-contact surfaces
must be properly examined for all of the above-cited purposes. Lack of convergence
between the various approaches followed to detect and quantify bioﬁlms does, however,
make it more difﬁcult for the food industry to locate the most effective ones [17]. The
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) system and good manufacturing
practices have been developed to regulate food safety and quality. Bacterial bioﬁlms are not
directly mentioned in the HACCP system employed on food processing facilities. Hence,
an updated HACCP system that contemplates evaluating bioﬁlms in food environments,
and establishes an apt sanitation plan, is expected to provide much clearer contamination
information, and to facilitate production in the food industry’s bioﬁlm-free processing
systems [18]. The importance and impact of bioﬁlms on the food industry have become clear
in several works where the cross-contamination is common among these food products,
with a wide range of pathogens, including Listeria monocytogenes, Yersinia enterocolitica,
Campylobacter jejuni, Salmonella spp., Staphylococcus spp., Bacillus cereus, and Echerichia coli
O157:H7 [19].

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 32  ment, more expensive energy costs, outbreaks, and food spoilage [5–8]. Biofilms have be-come more robust to disinfections in many wide-ranging food industries, such as pro-cessing seafood, brewing, dairy processing, and meat and poultry processing [9] There is compelling evidence for biofilm lifestyle making them more resilient to antimicrobial agents, particularly compared to planktonic cells (Figures 1 and 2). This entails having to remove them from surfaces of food processing plants, which poses a massive task [10–12]. Microbiological surface management is relevant for assessing and making decisions as to whether residual microbial species are found at a suitable level, and if harmful mi-croorganisms are removed. The obtained results will allow criteria to be set, such as how to clean surfaces and food product quality [13,14].  Figure 1. Biofilm formation and development stages. Sensory tests that involve visually inspecting surfaces with good lighting, smelling unpleasant odours, and feeling encrusted or greasy surfaces are run as a process regula-tion to instantly overcome visible sanitation defects, while microbiological evaluations are often made to guarantee consistency with microbial standards and to make improvements to sanitation procedures [15]. The fact that visual inspection cannot coincide with bacterial counts has been well-documented [16]. The hygienic conditions of food-contact surfaces must be properly examined for all of the above-cited purposes. Lack of convergence be-tween the various approaches followed to detect and quantify biofilms does, however, make it more difficult for the food industry to locate the most effective ones [17]. The Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) system and good manufacturing practices have been developed to regulate food safety and quality. Bacterial biofilms are not directly mentioned in the HACCP system employed on food processing facilities. Hence, an updated HACCP system that contemplates evaluating biofilms in food envi-ronments, and establishes an apt sanitation plan, is expected to provide much clearer con-tamination information, and to facilitate production in the food industry’s biofilm-free processing systems [18]. The importance and impact of biofilms on the food industry have become clear in several works where the cross-contamination is common among these food products, with a wide range of pathogens, including Listeria monocytogenes, Yersinia enterocolitica, Campylobacter jejuni, Salmonella spp., Staphylococcus spp., Bacillus cereus, and Echerichia coli O157:H7 [19].  Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

3 of 31

Figure 2. Bioﬁlm structure in the growth and maturation stages [20].

The main objectives of this review were to identify the most important bioﬁlm exam-
ples in the food industry and to present methods to visualise in situ bioﬁlm production,
how to avoid this production, and methods to remove bioﬁlms. This study focused on the
microbial bioﬁlms that affect the food industry and provides an overview of their impor-
tance in cross-contamination when food comes into contact with surfaces. Although going
into detail in each discipline, speciﬁc to microbiology for bioﬁlm isolation and identiﬁcation,
is not the object of this work, it contributes new knowledge about techniques to control
and eradicate bioﬁlms in the food industry from food safety and quality perspectives.

2. Bioﬁlm Development in Food Processing Environments

Modern food processing lines are a suitable environment for bioﬁlms to form on
food contact surfaces, primarily due to manufacturing plants’ complexity, long production
periods, mass product generation, and large bioﬁlm growth areas [21]. Many food-borne
bacteria may, therefore, bind to the contact surfaces present in these areas, which could
contribute to increase the risk of bacterial food-borne diseases. By way of example, 80%
of bacterial infections in the USA are believed to be related speciﬁcally to food-borne
pathogens in bioﬁlms [9].

Mixed-species bioﬁlm production is extremely dynamic and depends on the attach-
ment surface’s characteristics [22], food matrix components [23], environmental condi-
tions [24], and involved bacterial cells [8,25].

Attachment surface properties, such as hydrophobicity, electrostatic charging, interface
roughness, and topography impact bioﬁlm formation and, thus, affect the overall hygiene
status of the surface [22,26]. Nevertheless, the precise consequence of some parameters
vastly varies under speciﬁc laboratory conditions. Some experiments have revealed that
bacterial attachment is more likely to happen on rougher surfaces [22,27], while others
have found no association between roughness and bacterial attachment [28]. Hydrophobic
surfaces tend to attract more bacteria, but studies that have tested the hydrophobicity effect
present opposing results [29,30], and other experiments indicate that hydrophilic surfaces
enable more bacterial adherence than hydrophobic equivalents [27,28]. The fact that clear
results are lacking might lie in the various methods and bacterial strains employed, and
in overall attachment likely being established for several reasons. The most popular food
contact material in the food industry is stainless steel type 304 because it is chemically
inert, easy to clean, and extremely corrosion-resistant at a range of processing temperatures.
Given its continuous usage, this material’s topography typically displays crevices and
cracks that protect bacteria from sanitising treatments and mechanical cleaning methods.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 32   Figure 2. Biofilm structure in the growth and maturation stages [20]. The main objectives of this review were to identify the most important biofilm exam-ples in the food industry and to present methods to visualise in situ biofilm production, how to avoid this production, and methods to remove biofilms. This study focused on the microbial biofilms that affect the food industry and provides an overview of their im-portance in cross-contamination when food comes into contact with surfaces. Although going into detail in each discipline, specific to microbiology for biofilm isolation and iden-tification, is not the object of this work, it contributes new knowledge about techniques to control and eradicate biofilms in the food industry from food safety and quality perspec-tives. 2. Biofilm Development in Food Processing Environments Modern food processing lines are a suitable environment for biofilms to form on food contact surfaces, primarily due to manufacturing plants’ complexity, long production pe-riods, mass product generation, and large biofilm growth areas [21]. Many food-borne bacteria may, therefore, bind to the contact surfaces present in these areas, which could contribute to increase the risk of bacterial food-borne diseases. By way of example, 80% of bacterial infections in the USA are believed to be related specifically to food-borne patho-gens in biofilms [9]. Mixed-species biofilm production is extremely dynamic and depends on the attach-ment surface’s characteristics [22], food matrix components [23], environmental condi-tions [24], and involved bacterial cells [8,25]. Attachment surface properties, such as hydrophobicity, electrostatic charging, inter-face roughness, and topography impact biofilm formation and, thus, affect the overall hy-giene status of the surface [22,26]. Nevertheless, the precise consequence of some param-eters vastly varies under specific laboratory conditions. Some experiments have revealed that bacterial attachment is more likely to happen on rougher surfaces [22,27], while oth-ers have found no association between roughness and bacterial attachment [28]. Hydro-phobic surfaces tend to attract more bacteria, but studies that have tested the hydropho-bicity effect present opposing results [29,30], and other experiments indicate that hydro-philic surfaces enable more bacterial adherence than hydrophobic equivalents [27,28]. The fact that clear results are lacking might lie in the various methods and bacterial strains employed, and in overall attachment likely being established for several reasons. The most popular food contact material in the food industry is stainless steel type 304 because it is chemically inert, easy to clean, and extremely corrosion-resistant at a range of processing temperatures. Given its continuous usage, this material’s topography typically displays crevices and cracks that protect bacteria from sanitising treatments and mechanical clean-ing methods. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

4 of 31

The food matrix components in food processing environments also inﬂuence bacterial
attachment [31]; e.g., food waste, such as milk and meat exudates enriched in fats, pro-
teins, and carbohydrates, facilitate microorganism growth and multiplication, and favour
dual-species bioﬁlm development by E. Coli and Staphylococcus aureus [32]. Milk lactose
improves bioﬁlm production by both Bacillus subtilis, by activating the LuxS-mediated
quorum-sensing system [33], and S. aureus through intercellular polysaccharide adhesion
development [34]. Improved bioﬁlm production by Geobacillus spp. in milk results in high
concentrations of free Ca2+ and Mg2+ [35].

Microbial cell properties, especially hydrophobicity, cellular membrane components
(e.g., protein and lipopolysaccharide), appendages (e.g., pili, ﬂagella, ﬁmbriae) and bacteria-
secreted EPS, also play a key role in stimulating bioﬁlm production [22]. Fluctuations in
bioﬁlm-forming capability among species or strains of different genotypes and serotypes
have been identiﬁed, which reveals the evolution of enhanced bioﬁlm formation from
various genetic backgrounds [8,36]. Similar species can also impact one another in a mixed
microbial community, which culminates in the co-colonisation of certain species.

3. Examples of the Most Relevant Bioﬁlms in the Food Industry

In the food industry, bioﬁlm-forming species appear in factory environments and
can be pathogenic to humans because they develop bioﬁlm structures. The processing
environments of the food industry, e.g., wood, glass, stainless steel, polyethylene, rubber,
polypropylene, etc., act as artiﬁcial substrates for these pathogens [37,38]. The character-
istics of the bacterial growth form on food in a processing environment involve different
behaviours when considering cleaning and disinfection processes. Controlling bioﬁlm
formations in the food industry can prove difﬁcult when having to decide the right strategy.
Examples of these relevant bioﬁlm-forming pathogens for the food industry are brieﬂy

described in Table 1.

3.1. Bacillus Cereus

Bacillus cereus is a Gram-positive anaerobic or facultative anaerobic spore-forming bac-
terium that can grow in various environments at wide-ranging temperatures (4 ◦C–50 ◦C).
It is resistant to chemicals, heat treatment, and radiation [39]. B. cereus is a frequently iso-
lated soil inhabitant from food and food products, such as rice, dairy products, vegetables
and meat. It secretes toxins that can cause sickness and diarrhoea symptoms in humans.
B. cereus is responsible for bioﬁlm formation on food contact surfaces, such as stainless
steel pipes, conveyor belts and storage tanks. It can also form ﬂoating or immersed bioﬁlms,
which can secrete a vast array of bacteriocins, metabolites, surfactants, as well as enzymes,
such as proteases and lipases, in bioﬁlms, which can affect food sensorial qualities [40].
Motility by bacterial ﬂagella confers access to suitable bioﬁlm formation surfaces, and is
required for bioﬁlms to spread on non-colonised surfaces. However, B. cereus ﬂagella have
not been found to be directly involved in adhesion to glass surfaces, but can play a key role
in bioﬁlm formation via their motility [55].

3.2. Campylobacter Jejuni

Campylobacter spp., mainly C. jejuni, are Gram-negative spiral, rod-shaped, or curved
thermophilic and bipolar ﬂagellated motile bacteria [41]. C. jejuni, also known as an
anaerobic bacterium, can develop bioﬁlms under both microaerophilic (5% O2 and 10%
CO2) and aerobic (20% O2) conditions [56]. Despite it being a fastidious organism, C. jejuni
can survive outside the avian intestinal tract before it reaches a human host. A range of
environmental elements initiates the formation of bioﬁlms, which are then affected by a set
of intrinsic factors [57]. The European Union One Health 2018 Zoonoses Report classiﬁes
C. jejuni as an opportunistic pathogen that is believed to be the causative agent of most
bacterial gastroenteritis cases, and has been regarded as a common commensal of food
animals and poultry, with turkeys and hens in particular [42]. When the preparation and
processing areas of food products or water become contaminated, such as unpasteurised

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

5 of 31

milk, C. jejuni reaches the human host by infecting and colonising the gastrointestinal tract
to cause disease [43].

Table 1. Bioﬁlm-forming pathogens in the food industry.

Pathogen

Characteristics

Contaminated Food

Examples of Harmful
Spoilage Effects

References

Bacillus cereus

Gram-positive,
spore-forming,
anaerobic, facultative
anaerobic

dairy products, rice,
vegetables, meat

diarrhoea and vomiting
symptoms

[39,40]

Campylobacter jejuni

Gram-negative, aerobic
and anaerobic

animals, poultry,
unpasteurised milk

Escherichia coli

Gram-negative,
rod-shaped

raw milk, fresh meat, fruits
and vegetables

bloody diarrhoea, fever,
stomach cramp, nausea
and vomiting

diarrhoea outbreaks
and haemolytic uremic
syndrome

listeriosis in the elderly,
pregnant women and
immune-compromised
patients

can cause
gastroenteritis or
septicaemia

methicillin resistance,
can cause vomiting and
diarrhoea

produces blue
discolouration on fresh
cheese.

production of acids or
enzymes leading to
off-ﬂavours

[41–43]

[44]

[45,46]

[47,48]

[49,50]

[17]

[51,52]

dairy products, meat,
ready-to-eat products, fruit, soft
cheeses, ice cream,
unpasteurised milk, candied
apples, frozen
vegetables, poultry

Poultry meat, bovine, ovine,
porcine, ﬁsh

meat products, poultry, egg
products, dairy products, salads,
bakery products, especially
cream-ﬁlled pastries and cakes,
and sandwich ﬁllings

fruits, vegetables, meat surfaces
and low-acid dairy products

dried dairy products

dried milk powder

an indicator of poor
hygiene

[53,54]

beer and brewery environment

rapid cell growth
makes beer turbid and
smells like rotten eggs
due to production of
sulphur compounds

[23]

Listeria monocytogenes

Salmonella Enterica

Staphylococcus aureus

Pseudomonas spp.

Geobacillus
stearothermophilus

Anoxybacillus
ﬂavithermus

Pectinatus spp.

Gram-positive,
rod-shaped, facultative
anaerobic

Gram-negative,
rod-shaped, ﬂagellate,
facultative aerobic

Gram-positive,
non-spore forming,
non-motile, facultative
anaerobic

psychrotrophic, motile,
Gram-negative
rod-shaped

thermophilic,
Gram-positive,
spore-forming, aerobic
or facultative anaerobic

thermophilic organism,
Gram-positive,
spore-forming,
facultatively anaerobic,
non-pathogenic

Gram-negative,
non-spore-forming,
anaerobic

3.3. Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC)

Escherichia coli is a Gram-negative and rod-shaped bacterium. Most E. coli strains form
part of human intestinal microbiota and pose no health problem. However, the virulence
types of E. coli include enterotoxigenic (ETEC), enteroinvasive (EIEC), enteropathogenic
(EPEC), and Vero cytotoxigenic (VTEC). O157:H7 EHEC is the most frequent serotype asso-
ciated with EHEC infections in humans in the USA [58]. Widespread E. coli dissemination

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

6 of 31

in natural environments is, to a great extent, due to its ability to grow as a bioﬁlm. It is
worth considering that several E. coli strains may cause disease in humans, and that En-
terohaemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) strains are the most relevant for the food industry. EHEC
serotype O157:H7 is the human pathogen responsible for bloody diarrhoea outbreaks
and haemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) worldwide. They can be transmitted by raw
milk, drinking water or fresh meat, fruit, and vegetables; e.g., melons, tomatoes, parsley,
coriander, spinach, lettuce, etc. [44].

E. coli can employ pili, ﬂagella and membrane proteins to initiate attachment to
inanimate surfaces when ﬂagella are lost after attachment and bacteria start producing
an extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) that helps to confer bacteria better resistance
to disinfectants [59]. There are reports indicating that although EHEC can form bioﬁlms
on different food industry surfaces, neither an effective means to prevent EHEC bioﬁlm
formation nor an effective treatment for its infections exists because antibiotic treatment
tends to increase the risk of haemolytic-uremic syndrome and kidney failure [60].

3.4. Listeria Monocytogenes

Listeria monocytogenes is a Gram-positive bacterium and a ubiquitous food-borne
pathogen that can appear in soil, food, and water. Its ingestion can result in abortions
in pregnant women, and other serious complications in the elderly and children. The
pathogen can be transmitted to several food types, such as dairy products, seafood, meat,
fruit, ready-to-eat meals, ice cream, soft cheeses, unpasteurised milk, frozen vegetables,
candied apples, and poultry [45,46], but it is not known to be resistant to pasteurisation
treatments [61]. The pathogen proliferates at low temperature, and is able to form pure
culture bioﬁlms or grow in multispecies bioﬁlms [62]. L. monocytogenes can survive under
acidic conditions for lengthy periods and can form bioﬁlms that grow without oxygen.
Its numbers are likely to rise or lower in bioﬁlms depending on the competing microbes
present [63].

Given the presence of pili, ﬂagella and membrane proteins, prevalent L. monocytogenes

strains possess good adhesion ability in food processing environments [64].

3.5. Salmonella Enterica

Salmonella enterica is a Gram-negative, rod-shaped, ﬂagellate and facultative aerobic

bacterium, and a species of the genus Salmonella [65].

It can cause gastroenteritis or septicaemia (in some serovars) [66]. Salmonella spp.
express proteinaceous extracellular ﬁbres known as curli, which are involved in surface
and cell-cell contacts, and in promoting community behaviour and host colonisation [67].
Besides curli, different ﬁmbrial adhesins have been identiﬁed with bioﬁlm formation
implications that are serotype-dependent [40]. S. enterica serovar Enteritidis is the most
frequent serotype to cause fever, vomiting, nausea diarrhoea, and abdominal pain as main
symptoms [47]. Poultry meat is a frequent reservoir for these bacteria in processed food,
whose importance as a food pathogen has been demonstrated by the fact that S. enterica
bioﬁlm formation on food surfaces was the ﬁrst reported case in 1966 to possess complex
multicellular structures [48].

When contaminating a food pipeline bioﬁlm, S. enterica may cause massive outbreaks,
and even death in infants and the elderly.
It can grow on stainless steel surfaces to
form a three-dimensional (3D) structure with several call layers of different morphologies
depending on available nutrients, such as the reticular shaped ones generated when
cultured on tryptic soy broth (TSB) medium [68].

3.6. Staphylococcus Aureus

Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive, non-spore-forming, non-motile, facultative
anaerobic bacterium capable of producing enterotoxins from 10–46 ◦C. S. aureus can multi-
ply on the skin and mucous membranes of food handlers, and can become a major issue
in food factories [49]. These enterotoxins are heat-stable and can be secreted during S.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

7 of 31

aureus growth in foods contaminated by food handlers. The bacterium grows well in high
salt- or sugar-content foods with little water activity. The foods frequently implicated in
Staphylococcal food-borne disease are meat and meat products, poultry and egg products,
milk and dairy products, bakery products, salads, and particularly cream-ﬁlled cakes and
pastries and sandwich ﬁllings [50]. S. aureus is known for its numerous enteric toxins. These
enterotoxins bind to class II MHC (major histocompatibility complex) in T-cells, which
results in their activation that can lead to acute toxic shock with sickness and diarrhoea [69].

3.7. Pseudomonas spp.

Pseudomonas is a heterotrophic, motile, Gram-negative rod-shaped bacterium. Pseu-
domonads are generally ubiquitous psychrotrophic spoilage organisms that are often found
in food processing environments, including ﬂoors and drains, and also on fruit, vegetables,
and meat surfaces, and in low-acid dairy products [17,62]. The extracellular ﬁlamentous
appendages produced by motile microorganisms result in both the attachment process
and the interaction with surfaces in different ways. Flagella and pili have been thoroughly
studied [70].

When bioﬁlms develop and their regulation by quorum sensing is considered, Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa can be taken as a model organism [71], which is about 1–5 µm long and
0.5–1.0 µm wide. A facultative aerobe grows via aerobic and anaerobic respiration with
nitrate as the terminal electron acceptor [71].

Pseudomonas spp. produce huge amounts of EPS and are known to attach and form
bioﬁlms on stainless steel surfaces. They can co-exist with other pathogens in bioﬁlms
to form multispecies bioﬁlms, which make them more resistant and stable [62]. These
bioﬁlms can be accompanied by a distinct blue discolouration (pyocyanin) on fresh cheese
produced by P. ﬂuorescens [72].

3.8. Geobacillus stearothermophilus

Geobacillus stearothermophilus is a Gram-positive, thermophilic, aerobic, or facultative
anaerobic bacterium [73]. Thermophiles, such as G. Stearothermophilus, formerly known
as Bacillus stearothermophilus, can attach to stainless steel surfaces on processing lines in
evaporators and plate heat exchangers, which allows them to grow and produce bioﬁlms,
which implies the potential release of single cells or aggregates of cells into the ﬁnal dry
product [74]. B. stearothermophilus are able to form bioﬁlms on clean stainless steel surfaces
and to release bacteria into milk during dairy industry processing [75]. The above-cited
authors observed that the conditions for a bioﬁlm in a laminar ﬂow milk system were more
adequate for the growth of spore-forming bacteria, which are thermophilic. Their growth
as a culture medium in milk is quite difﬁcult [75].

3.9. Anoxybacillus ﬂavithermus

Anoxybacillus ﬂavithermus is another Gram-positive, thermophilic, and spore-forming
organism that is facultatively anaerobic and non-pathogenic [76]. A. ﬂavithermus is a poten-
tial contaminant of dairy products, and poses a problem for the milk powder processing
industry, as high levels will reduce milk powder acceptability for both local and interna-
tional markets [77]. A. ﬂavithermus spores are very heat-resistant and their vegetative cells
can grow at temperatures up to 65 ◦C with a signiﬁcant increase in bacterial adhesion on
stainless steel surfaces in the presence of skimmed milk. This indicates that milk positively
inﬂuences these species’ bioﬁlm formation [78]. In the dairy industry, the commonest
bioﬁlm-forming isolates are thermophilic genera [79]. In many parts of the world, A.
ﬂavithermus and G. stearothermophilus are regarded as the most dominant thermophilic
microbial contaminants of milk powders [78].

3.10. Pectinatus spp.

Pectinatus is Gram-negative, non-spore-forming, and anaerobic bacteria that have been
linked with a high concentration of bioﬁlms in breweries due to sanitation problems [80].

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

8 of 31

Spoilage bacteria were ﬁrst isolated from a brewery in the USA in unpasteurised beer stored
at 30 ◦C [81]. P. cerevisiiphilus have also been isolated from many breweries in Germany,
Spain, Norway, Japan, the Netherlands, Sweden, and France [80].

3.11. Synergistic Pathogens

A combination of several pathogens can synergistically interact to form bioﬁlms in the
food industry. In food-processing environments, bacteria are able to exist as multispecies
bioﬁlms, from where both spoilage and pathogenic bacteria can contaminate food [82].
For instance in the ﬁshing industry, fresh ﬁsh products can suffer from bioﬁlm formation
by mixed pathogenic species (Aeromonas hydrophila, L. monocytogenes, S. enterica, or Vibrio
spp.), which can imply signiﬁcant health and economic issues [83]. Synergistic interactions
have been observed in a fresh-cut produce processing plant, where E. coli interacted with
Burkholderia caryophylli and Ralstonia insidiosa to form mixed bioﬁlms. Acylhomoserine
lactones (AHLs) can control bioﬁlm formation in synergistic interactions among mixed
species. Interference of AHLs is manifested by AHL lactonases and acylases, both of which
are present in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria [60].

Bacteria use quorum sensing to coordinate bioﬁlm production and dispersion, when
bacteria attach to a biotic or abiotic surface, and cell-to-cell attachment engages in com-
munication via a quorum sensing (QS)-based extracellular cell signalling system [84]. The
importance of cell signalling for bacterial bioﬁlm formation has been further conﬁrmed
by the control of exopolysaccharide synthesis by quorum-sensing signals, as in Vibrio
cholera [85].

Synergistic pathogens are found in several works, where bioﬁlm levels of the four-
species consortia have been further examined and compared to the bioﬁlm production
levels of each isolate under monospecies conditions. They have revealed that P. aeruginosa
and A. junii isolated from different samples to contribute as best bioﬁlm producers, includ-
ing poor or non-bioﬁlm-producing isolates, which increases the overall bioﬁlm formation
in the included consortia [86]. Several authors [87] have found positive synergistics in
other studies by investigating mixed species of bioﬁlms, such as Candida albicans.

In food industries, bioﬁlm-related effects (pathogenicity, corrosion of metal surfaces,
and alteration to organoleptic properties due to the secretion of proteases or lipases) are
critically important. For example, in the dairy industry several processes and structures
(pipelines, raw milk tanks, butter centrifuges, pasteurisers, cheese tanks, packing tools) can
act as surface substrates for bioﬁlm formation at different temperatures and involve several
mixed colonising species. Thus, it is essential that accurate methods to visualise bioﬁlms in
situ be set up to avoid contamination and to ensure food safety in the food industry.

4. Bioﬁlm Control and Elimination

It is well-known that bioﬁlm bacteria present a distinct phenotype with a genotype as
regards gene transcription and growth rates under very particular conditions that differ
from planktonic conditions [88]. Bioﬁlms are capable of adhering to a very wide diversity of
surfaces with distinct biotic and abiotic compositions, including human tissue and medical
devices. Once bioﬁlms form, they are a major threat because they cause infectious diseases
and economic loss. In the 1940s, several authors produced further research works into
bioﬁlm evolution and surface relations for marine microorganisms [89] and seawater [90].
Nevertheless, marked progress has been made given the incorporation of the electron
microscope, which allows high-resolution photomicroscopy at much higher magniﬁcations
than light microscopy [85]. Indeed, the most revealing discovery of the relation with bioﬁlm
elimination was a description of its structure, the surrounding matrix material, and the
cells enclosed in these bioﬁlms were polysaccharides, as by special stains revealed [85].
Doubtlessly, disinfectants have proven more efﬁcient in ﬁghting against bioﬁlms since 1973,
while Characklis (1973) [91] showed marked persistence and resistance to disinfectants,
such as chlorine.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

9 of 31

4.1. Bioﬁlm Elimination in the Food Industry

Bioﬁlm formation has been investigated in food industry and hospital environments.
Perhaps, in the research conducted, hospitals, to eliminate bioﬁlms, have been more
successful, thanks to the easier applications and special surface compositions (antibioﬁlm
activity) in medical surroundings, such as implants, prostheses, tools, and surfaces for
operating theatres.

To date, many efforts have been made to reduce bioﬁlm formation on food industry
surfaces, but those works were based mainly on new disinfectants with different efﬁcacies.
These results have improved in line with speciﬁc mechanisms for initial surface attachment,
developing a group structure and ecosystem, and detachments [75] with dissimilar results.
Nowadays, disinfectants are the best ally to eliminate bioﬁlms. However, other
research ﬁelds, such as the composition of surfaces for materials to prevent bacterial
adhesion and developing phages to combat bioﬁlm-forming bacteria, have obtained
favourable results. Doubtlessly, most research works have focused on the bacteriolog-
ical bioﬁlm, without discussing the hypothesis of ﬁlamentous fungi being responsible
for bioﬁlm formation. Several authors [92,93] support this theory, where the presence of
Aspergillus fumigatus has been presented as bioﬁlm-responsible. In this case, the marked
similitude of bacteriological and ﬁlamentous fungi bioﬁlms is based on morphological
changes, the presence of an extracellular polymeric matrix, differential gene expression,
and distinct sensitivity to antifungal drugs compared to diffuse or loosely associated
(planktonic) colonies [94,95].

Before we go on to explain several factors that could inﬂuence bacterial adhesion and
bioﬁlm formation, we should bear the food industry’s hygiene design in mind. In order to
prevent microorganisms entering food production, factories, and the employed hygienic
equipment should be designed to limit microorganisms from accessing. Aseptic equipment
must be isolated from microorganisms and foreign particulates. To prevent microorganism
growth, equipment should be designed to prevent any areas where microorganisms can
harbour and grow, along with gaps, crevices, and dead areas. This is also important during
production, when microorganisms can grow very quickly under favourable conditions [96].
According to such premises, food companies have the capacity to apply innovation
to design the industry and its equipment. In both the USA and the European Union (EU),
the trend in regulations in this ﬁeld is not so much command and control by government
regulators, but lies more in self-determination by the food industry. In particular, hazard
analysis and critical control points (HACCP) systems provide the skills to replace detailed
regulatory requirements with the overall goals to be fulﬁlled [97]. The Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Food
Safety Inspection Service (FSIS) share primary responsibility for regulating food safety in
the USA. One example is the recommendation for equipment and process controls: “Seams
on food-contact surfaces shall be smoothly bonded or maintained to reduce accumulation
of food particles, dirt, and organic matter and thus minimise the opportunity for growth of
microorganisms” [85].

European Union (EU) statutory instruments include EC regulation no. 852/2004
(Hygiene of Foodstuffs) and EC regulation no. 853/2004 (Speciﬁc Rules Food of Animal
Origin), which expect food manufacturers to control food safety risks by HACCP systems.
In short, the performance of a cleaning and disinfection programme (CDP) to avoid
bioﬁlm formation should start by aptly designing the hygiene of equipment, surfaces, and
devices. Today the CDP is a proven effective measure in ﬁghting against bioﬁlms.

4.2. Factors Associated with Bacteria

Several factors associated with surfaces or bacteria can inﬂuence adhesion from the

planktonic phase and bioﬁlm evolution, such as:

Surfaces:

•

Surface charge: the adhesion sequence can be inﬂuenced by the particle surface charge
in combination with the electrode’s surface charge.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

10 of 31

• Hydrophobicity: adsorption of surface-active organics inﬂuences the surface’s hy-

•

•

drophobic or hydrophilic character, and changes surface tension [98].
Temperature: temperature and contact time impact the bacterial adhesion and bioﬁlm
formation process, and increasing the formulation of mathematical models is necessary
to assess how both factors and their interactions inﬂuence the process [99].
Presence of substrates: adsorption of electrolyte components and the particle surface
are equally important. Adsorption of surface-active organics impacts the surface’s
hydrophobic or hydrophilic character, and also changes surface tension [98].

Bacterial cellular surface components:
Hydrophobic interactions tend to increase with the enhanced non-polar nature of one
involved surface or more, and most bacteria are negatively charged [85]. This means that
the cell surface’s hydrophobicity is a relevant factor during adhesion.

•

Fimbria, pili, and ﬂagella: ﬁmbriae, non-ﬂagellar appendages other than those impli-
cated in the transfer of viral or bacterial nucleic acids (known as pili) are responsible
for cell surface hydrophobicity. Most investigated ﬁmbriae contain a high proportion
of hydrophobic amino acid residues [100]. Fimbriae include adhesins that attach to
some sort of substratum so that bacteria can withstand shear forces and obtain nutri-
ents. Therefore, ﬁmbriae play a role in cell surface hydrophobicity and attachment,
presumably by overcoming the initial electrostatic repulsion barrier between the cell
and the substratum [101].

Studies’ responses surface methods are used to not only develop and optimise models
for food processing systems and operations, but also to better elucidate bacterial adhe-
sion and bioﬁlm formation processes. The response surface method provides valuable
information to help decision making about disinfection and cleaning procedures for the
utensils, equipment and containers employed in the food industry [102]. Hence, surfaces
and materials of equipment, plus ﬂoors and walls, also impact bioﬁlms, along with dead
spaces, crevices, porous and rough material surfaces, which must be eliminated to avoid
bioﬁlm formation [12].

The most adopted strategies for controlling bioﬁlms are sanitation procedures that
combine detergents and disinfectants. Alkaline detergent eliminates organic and inorganic
acid detergent waste from surfaces, while disinfectants reduce spoilage microorganisms,
and diminish or eliminate pathogens, to safe levels [12]. Enzymatic detergents have
replaced traditional alkaline and acid detergents, because enzymes (proteases, lipases,
amylases) can remove bioﬁlms in the food industry [102] as enzymes reduce the physical
integrity of PS by weakening the structural bonds of the lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates
that form its structure [103]. Other advantages over detergents include low-toxicity and
biodegradability, but application costs and requirements (temperature, time) are higher
than detergents. This is why several detergent manufacturers have marketed a synergetic
combination of enzymes, chelating agents, surfactants, and solvents.

4.3. Disinfectants and Bioﬁlm Resistance

The most widely used disinfectants in the food industry’s disinfection programmes
are quaternary ammonium compounds (QAC), amphoteric compounds, hypochlorites,
peroxides (peracetic acid and hydrogen peroxide) [15], aldehydes (formaldehyde, glu-
taraldehyde, paraformaldehyde), and phenolics. This product list remains unchanged after
18 years. Today, alkyl amines, chlorine dioxide and quaternary ammonium blends are
incorporated into disinfection programmes. Besides these, alcohols, phenolic compounds,
aldehydes, and chlorhexidine are also resorted to, but mostly in health services. In the food
processing industry, disinfectants can remain on surfaces for longer due to microorganisms’
prolonged exposure to the employed disinfectant, which improves their efﬁcacy [104].

1.

Sodium hypochlorite (NaOCI):

It is one of the most widespread disinfectants in the food industry despite its disadvan-
tages and the growing use of new products on the market. Its desirable reaction produces

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

11 of 31

both hypochlorous acid (HOCl) and the hypochlorite ion (-OCl), which are strong oxidising
agents that eliminate cells given their ability to cross the cell membrane, and to oxidise
the sulfhydryl groups of certain enzymes participating on the glycolytic pathway [97]. It
has been described to react with wide-ranging biological molecules, such as proteins [105],
amino acids [106], lipids [107], peptides [108], and DNA [109] under physiological pH
conditions [110].

However, sodium hypochlorite may be affected by organic matter because free chlo-
rine might react with natural organic matter and be converted into inorganic chloramines
to generate trihalomethanes, by reducing antimicrobial activity against bioﬁlms [111], and
it is known to be less reactive than free chlorine. Peracetic acid is reported as being the
most effective sanitiser against bioﬁlms because it is a strong oxidising agent that does not
interact with organic matter waste [112,113].

2. Quaternary ammonium:

QACs, such as benzalkonium chloride, cetrimide, didecyldimethylammonium chlo-
ride, and cetylpyridinium chloride, are cationic detergents (surfactants or surface-active
agents). They reduce surface tension and form micelles to lead to dispersion in a liquid.
This property is resourceful for removing microorganisms. They are membrane-active
agents that interact with not only the cytoplasmic membrane of bacteria, but with the
plasma membrane of yeast. Their hydrophobic activity also makes them effective against
lipid-containing viruses. QACs interact with intracellular targets and bind to DNA [114].
However, their efﬁcacy is still questioned given the appearance of relatively high resistance
to Listeria monocytogenes (10%), Staphylococcus spp. (13%), and Pseudomonas spp. (30%), and
lower resistance to lactic acid the bacteria (1.5%) and coliforms (1%) isolated from food and
the food processing industry [115].

3.

Peracetic acid:

In the last decade, peracetic acid (PAA) has been widely used by the food industry
in water and wastewater treatment, even in paper machines [116], to control bioﬁlms. Its
antimicrobial effect is probably due to the oxidation of thiol groups in proteins, disruption
of membranes [117], or damage to bases in DNA [118]. Its use has been shown to increase
the sensitivity of bacterial spores to heat [119]. The efﬁcacy and environmental safety of
peracetic acid make it an attractive disinfecting agent for industrial use.

Bacterial regrowth after oxidant treatment (peracetic acid and free chlorine) depends
on the absence or presence of organic matter. The oxidation-reduction (redox) potential
of PAA (1.385 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode or standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)
for the redox couple of CH3COOOH(aq)/(CH3COO−
(aq) + H2O(l))) comes close to that of
free chlorine (1.288 V vs. SHE for the redox couple of HOCl(aq)/Cl−
(aq)) under biochemical
standard state conditions (pH 7.0, 25 ◦C, 101.325 Pa) [120]. For this reason, acid peracetic
and free chlorine may have similar efﬁciencies in preventing planktonic bacteria regrowth
in the absence of organic matter. As PAA reacts with organic matter more slowly than free
chlorine, its self-decomposition is slower [121].

Resistance to Disinfectants

Bacterial resistance to disinfectants in the planktonic phase can hardly be compared to
bioﬁlm resistance. Yet several studies have shown contrary results to widespread belief,
such as the existence of wide interspeciﬁc variability of resistance to disinfectants. Gram-
positive strains generally appear to better resist than Gram-negative strains. This resistance
is also variable among strains of the same species [122].

Given the growing interest in knowing bioﬁlm resistance to chlorine, quaternary
ammonium and peracetic acid, many studies have been conducted [123]. The bacteria
in mature bioﬁlms are 10- to 1000-fold more resistant to antibiotics than the bacteria in
the planktonic phase [124], and this resistance appears against biocides. However, this
natural resistance is still unknown, and probably depends on many factors, mainly of
structural bioﬁlm barriers and genetic factors for adaptation. To explain this resistance,

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

12 of 31

several authors [125] have suggested three possible causes by three hypotheses: the ﬁrst
is based on the slow or incomplete diffusion of antibiotics into inner bioﬁlm layers. The
second lies in the changes taking place in the bioﬁlm microenvironment as some bioﬁlm
bacteria fall into a slow growth state due to lack of nutrients or given the accumulation of
harmful metabolites and, therefore, survive [126]. Finally, the third hypothesis indicates a
subpopulation of cells in the bioﬁlm whose differentiation resembles the spore formation
process. They have a unique and highly resistant phenotype to protect them from the
effects of antibiotics, and are a biologically programmed response to the sessile life form of
bacteria [127].

In addition, aquatic fauna is less affected by PAA than by chlorine [128]. There-
fore, PAA is considered a green alternative to chlorine for disinfection purposes, and its
disinfection performance is currently being investigated [120].

As previously mentioned, there are two very different situations for action against
bioﬁlm formation: the food industry and the health ﬁeld. There is still a lot to do in
both ﬁelds, but it is true that CDP is practically the only implementation in the food
industry. The health ﬁeld has witnessed much more progress: phages [129], aerosolisa-
tion [130], sonication brush [131], and metal ion solutions (silver, copper, platinum, gold,
and palladium) [132].

In short, some authors [133] establish two strategies for ﬁghting bioﬁlms in the food
industry: structural modiﬁcation of surfaces or application of antibacterial or antibioﬁlm
coatings [134]. Thus, several alternative products to classic disinfectants (chlorine, quater-
nary ammonium, etc.), such as, plant-derived antimicrobials (essential oils: orange-sorrel,
lemon, lavender, chamomile, peppermint, oregano), with thymol and carvacrol being the
compounds that display more signiﬁcant antimicrobial action in shorter action times.

4.4. Alternative Methods to Eliminate Bioﬁlms

Phages: bacteriophages are speciﬁc “viruses” of microbial cells that are speciﬁc to the
different serotypes or strains of microbial species, and are obligate parasites with a genetic
parasitism [135]. Bacteriophages inject their DNA and force the cell to produce the bacte-
riophage genome and structures (e.g., capsid and tail). When phages are complete, they
lyse cells, which means that bacteriophage infection can destroy the entire colony [136,137].
In the last few years, the FDA/USA approved preparing bacteriophages (LISTEX P100) to
combat the direct presence of L. monocytogenes in foods [138,139].

Aerosolisation: a disinfection method with different disinfectants applied to working
areas by pulverisation. Several authors [138] have shown its efﬁcacy as a bioﬁlm control
method in the food industry and hospitals by using hydrogen peroxide [140], sodium
hypochlorite, and peracetic acid [141].

Knowledge about the resistance mechanisms associated with bioﬁlm evolution could
be primordial to develop new actions or strategies by biocides and antibiotics [142], such as
modiﬁed wound dressings with phyto-nanostructured coatings to prevent staphylococcal
and pseudomonal bioﬁlm development [143].

Involving bacterial adherence: in recent years, new biochemistry methods have been
studied to prevent bioﬁlm formation. The most efﬁcient strategy would interfere with
bacterial adherence, as this ﬁrst step is paramount in bioﬁlm formation, performed by the
direct blockage of surface receptors [144] or by a non-speciﬁc strategy, which normally
involves compounds with anti-adherence properties [145]. Another bioﬁlm inhibition form
would be to impede communication processes between bacteria to enter the bioﬁlm by
employing different natural or artiﬁcially synthesised compounds [146]. One example
of this is P. aeruginosa, which uses quorum sensing for modular bioﬁlm evolution, and
proposes that agents are capable of blocking quorum sensing (QS), and could be useful for
avoiding bioﬁlm formation [144].

The role of the QS in bioﬁlms includes controlling the cell-to-cell communicating sys-
tem in response to small diffusible signal molecules, such as N-acyl-homoserine lactones
(AHLs), produced by Gram-negative bacteria [147]. It has been shown to play crucial roles

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

13 of 31

in bioﬁlm formation by activating the transcription of related genes [148]. Speciﬁcally,
different AHLs have been detected in bioﬁlm reactors and several bacterial species have
been identiﬁed to possess the capacity to produce AHLs [149]. Thus, AHLs-based QS
has been widely reported to regulate many microbial behaviours, including EPS expres-
sion, nitrogen transformation, organic pollutant degradation and microbial community
construction [150].

Current advances in nanoscience nanotechnology and nanosensors [151] have emerged
for applications to detect microorganisms and bioﬁlms [152] with high sensitivity and good
spatial resolution on nanoscale scopes [153]. Recent works have been published on imaging
approaches of bioﬁlm microprocesses [154], in-situ surface-enhanced Raman Scattering
(SERS) analyses, bioﬁlm visualisation [155] and biosensors of bacteria in foods [156]. The
enormous advantages and great potential observed in bioassays based on multifunctional
optical nanosensors are promising to continue with a view to ensure and promote food
safety and quality. From the detection targets perspective, QS detection might become a
new bioﬁlm research trend based on evidence that bioﬁlm formation can be inhibited by
blocking QS [151].

5. Bioﬁlm Identiﬁcation Techniques and Methods to Visualise Bioﬁlms In Situ
5.1. General Aspects of Bioﬁlm Study Techniques

Doubtlessly, bioﬁlms can pose a major challenge in both clinical microbiology and
hygiene food areas. In the latter area, several authors consider them a real threat. Currently,
methods aim to analyse bioﬁlm formation and development, which have not yet been
standardised. Different methods have been followed to qualitatively and quantitatively
evaluate bioﬁlms, and each one is useful for estimating one peculiar bioﬁlm lifestyle
aspect [157]. Nevertheless, research to identify and acquire knowledge of bioﬁlms has
allowed distinct techniques to be developed and adapted from microbiology or cell histol-
ogy. It is essential to evaluate bioﬁlm formation for a sensitive, speciﬁc and reproducible
methodology for bioﬁlm quantiﬁcation to become available.

Different approaches classify the methods followed to detection bioﬁlms on very
distinct surfaces: (i) the simplest classiﬁcation of methods is direct or indirect [17]. (ii)
Rapid tests of hygienic control, and methods for microscopic, biomolecular, extracellular
polymeric, physical, or chemical substances (EPS) are another possible classiﬁcation [158].
(iii) A recent publication [159] only refers to the technology of the referred methods being
classiﬁed as physics, physico-chemistry or chemistry, and recommends three effective
approaches for testing bioﬁlms: (a) observations by various microscopic methods with
different view ﬁelds at the same point; (b) in-depth data analyses during microscopic
image processing; (c) a combination study using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and
chemical analysis. Perhaps this is the most advanced and appropriate methodology for
bioﬁlm analyses, where the detailed image of the surface will help to build a relation
among the bioﬁlm matrix, interactions and other factors like pH, surfaces [159]. However,
there is another case in which bacterial species can help to reduce bioﬁlms, where Bacillus
licheniformis can express hydrolytic enzymes capable of reducing detrimental bioﬁlms [160].
Therefore, depending on the set objectives, that is, what we wish to achieve with
the bioﬁlm, we should choose a technique according to our study. Not all techniques are
suitable for a certain purpose, but might be compatible. Thus, some methods are suited for
quantifying the bioﬁlm matrix, while others are able to evaluate both living and dead cells,
or exclusively quantify viable cells in bioﬁlms.

By considering the complexity and heterogeneity of the bioﬁlm structure, the exact
research objective should be set. The amount of EPS, the total number of bacterial cells
embedded in bioﬁlms, or the actual number of living bacteria in bioﬁlms must be consid-
ered to be different targets that require distinct experimental approaches [157]. We should
bear in mind that the bioﬁlm volume is constituted mainly by an extracellular matrix
(95–65% range), which is composed mostly of proteins (>2%), and other constituents, such
as polysaccharides (1–2%), DNA molecules (<1%), RNA (<1%), ions (bound and free),

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

14 of 31

and ﬁnally 97% water [161]. Thus, the bioﬁlm research methodology should address the
identiﬁcation of bacteria and other matrix constituents.

In order to obtain a fundamental understanding of the formation and presence of
bacterial bioﬁlms, our analysis should include the detection of bacteria and the matrix.
The most frequently followed methods to assess bioﬁlm heterogeneity are direct micro-
scopic imaging of the local bioﬁlm morphology or microscopic measurements of local
bioﬁlm thickness [162]. For many applications, time-lapse microscopy with Confocal Laser
Scanning Microscopy (CLSM) is an ideal tool for monitoring at a spatial resolution in the
order of micrometres, and it allows the non-destructive study of bioﬁlms by examining
all layers at different depths. In this way, it is possible to reconstruct a three-dimensional
structure [163]. Matrix detection can be achieved by a double-staining technique combined
with CLSM, which allows the simultaneous imaging of bacterial cells and glycocalyx in
bioﬁlms [164].

5.2. Colorimetric Methods
5.2.1. Evaluating the Bioﬁlm Matrix

Staining the bioﬁlms grown in microtiter plates wells is widely utilised by researchers
to screen and compare bioﬁlm formation by different bacteria or under various condi-
tions [165]. Of the methods described in the literature, crystal violet (CAS number 931418
92 7) [166] is the most widespread for bioﬁlm biomass quantiﬁcation [167,168]. This basic
dye binds negatively charged molecules and, thus, stains are able to dye both bacteria and
the surrounding bioﬁlm matrix. Acetic acid can be used as the extraction solvent and be
measured by absorbance at 700–600 nm. Safranin staining can also be employed for bioﬁlm
biomass quantiﬁcation [165,169], but results in lower optical densities than crystal violet
staining and, therefore, may not be as sensitive to detect small amounts of bioﬁlm [165].

Crystal violet staining tests the concentration of the dye incorporated into bacterial
cell walls, and depends on cells’ integrity, but not on viability. However, other methods like
ATP bioluminescence report the cell’s metabolic status and drops to undetectable limits
within minutes after cell death. Resorting to both methods can provide supplementary
information on the cell exposed to disinfectant. The results can indicate that, despite the
drastic drop in viable cell numbers in the bioﬁlm after disinfectant treatment, a signiﬁcant
number of intact cells, or cellular debris, may still be capable of retaining the dye. This
observation leads to the question about the reliability of crystal violet staining as a method
to monitor bioﬁlm disinfection [170].

Another colorimetric method for living cells is ﬂuorescein diacetate (CAS number
596 09 8), which employs a useful live-cell ﬂuorescent stain that is hydrolysed to ﬂuorescent
ﬂuorescein in live cells. The signal can be spectrophotometrically measured. This is suitable
for cell viability assays with intact membranes as dead cells are unable to metabolise
ﬂuorescein diacetate. Thus, there is no ﬂuorescent signal [157].

5.2.2. Cell Staining

Visualising a cell with ﬂuorescent compounds provides a wide variety of information
to analyse cell functions. Various activities and cell structures can be targeted for staining
with ﬂuorescent compounds [171]. These cell components are mostly cell membranes,
nucleotides, and proteins. The stain can pass to cells depending on the molecule charge,
hydrophobicity, or reactivity. Thus, small neutral and positively charged ﬂuorescent
compounds can normally reach mitochondria for dyeing. Negatively charged molecules
cannot pass through viable cell membranes. Ester is a suitable functional group for staining
viable cells because it can pass through viable cell membranes, where it is hydrolysed by
cellular esterases into a negatively charged compound [171].

Other complementary techniques can be run to examine the performances of advanced
microscopic techniques employed to study microbial bioﬁlms (i.e., confocal laser scanning
microscopy, mass spectrometry, electron microscopy, Raman spectroscopy) [157].

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

15 of 31

Spectroﬂuorometric assays for the quantiﬁcation of bioﬁlms of gram-negative and
gram-positive bacteria is a method that utilises the speciﬁc binding of the wheat germ
agglutinin-Alexa Fluor 488 conjugate (WGA) to N-acetylglucosamine in bioﬁlms [172].
This lectin conjugate also binds to N-acetylneuraminic acid on the peptidoglycan layer
of gram-positive bacteria. WGA speciﬁcally binds to polysaccharide adhesin (poly N-
acetylglucosamine), which is involved in bioﬁlm formation by both gram-positive and
gram-negative bacteria. Burton et al. [172] compared the colorimetric assay with the
spectroﬂuorometric assay, whose results revealed that WGA staining may be a more
speciﬁc means of E. coli and Staphylococcus epidermidis bioﬁlm detection and quantiﬁcation.

5.2.3. LIVE/DEAD

This method is based on employing two different nucleic acid binding stains. The
ﬁrst dye is green ﬂuorescent (Syto9, λex 486 nm and λem 501 nm), which is able to cross
all bacterial membranes and bind to the DNA of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria. The second dye is red-ﬂuorescent (propidium-iodide (PI), CAS number 25535-16-4,
λex 530 nm and λem 620 nm), which crosses only damaged bacterial membranes. Stained
samples are observed under a ﬂuorescent optical microscopy to evaluate live and dead
bacterial populations (see Figures 3–5). In fact, live bacteria ﬂuoresce in green and dead
bacteria ﬂuoresce in orange/red [173]. The efﬁciency of both stains is conditioned by some
factors, such as the reagent’s binding afﬁnity to cells [169], physiological cell state [174],
reagent concentration [175], and temperature and incubation time [176].

Both stains are suitable for use in ﬂuorescence microscopy, confocal laser scanning mi-
croscopy, ﬂuorometry ﬂow and cytometry, and can be employed as a nuclear counterstain.
LIVE/DEAD staining cannot be performed for the direct staining of bioﬁlms on surfaces
because of interference between the stain and polysaccharides of the bioﬁlm matrix and
slime [177].

This method’s main downside involves having to observe a statistically relevant
portion of the sample, which is representative of the whole population. Overall, the
method provides only semiquantitative results because the total count of bacterial cells
is not possible [178]. Nevertheless, this inconvenience can be prevented by employing
imaging software, such as cellSens®, which can count and measure cells depending on the
staining cell.

Figure 3. Planktonic state of Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens stained with LIVE/DEAD (SYTO 9 and propid-
ium iodine) after treatment with sodium hypochlorite (500 ppm) for 15 min. Viable bacteria (green)
and damaged bacteria (red). Magniﬁcation ×100.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 32   Figure 3. Planktonic state of Pseudomonas fluorescens stained with LIVE/DEAD (SYTO 9 and propid-ium iodine) after treatment with sodium hypochlorite (500 ppm) for 15 minutes. Viable bacteria (green) and damaged bacteria (red). Magnification ×100.  Figure 4. Planktonic state of Pseudomonas fluorescens stained with LIVE/DEAD (SYTO 9 and propid-ium iodine) after treatment with peracetic acid (250 ppm) for 15 min. Viable bacteria (green) and damaged bacteria (red). Magnification ×100. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

16 of 31

Figure 4. Planktonic state of Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens stained with LIVE/DEAD (SYTO 9 and propid-
ium iodine) after treatment with peracetic acid (250 ppm) for 15 min. Viable bacteria (green) and
damaged bacteria (red). Magniﬁcation ×100.

Figure 5. Planktonic state of Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens stained with LIVE/DEAD (SYTO 9 and propid-
ium iodine) after treatment with Sodium hypochlorite (350 ppm) for 15 min. Viable bacteria (green)
and damaged bacteria (red). Magniﬁcation ×100.

5.2.4. Different Fluorescents Stainings

The application of ﬂuorescent stains to cells and food soil can be useful for the quantita-
tive analysis of surface cleanability. Thus, the stain combination and working concentration
are essential for assessing the hygienic conditions of surfaces [179] or testing disinfectant
efﬁcacy against bacteria. Different methods can be followed to visualise and differentiate
cells and organic matter. The staining techniques to measure surface coverage by the two

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 32   Figure 3. Planktonic state of Pseudomonas fluorescens stained with LIVE/DEAD (SYTO 9 and propid-ium iodine) after treatment with sodium hypochlorite (500 ppm) for 15 minutes. Viable bacteria (green) and damaged bacteria (red). Magnification ×100.  Figure 4. Planktonic state of Pseudomonas fluorescens stained with LIVE/DEAD (SYTO 9 and propid-ium iodine) after treatment with peracetic acid (250 ppm) for 15 min. Viable bacteria (green) and damaged bacteria (red). Magnification ×100. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 32   Figure 5. Planktonic state of Pseudomonas fluorescens stained with LIVE/DEAD (SYTO 9 and propid-ium iodine) after treatment with Sodium hypochlorite (350 ppm) for 15 min. Viable bacteria (green) and damaged bacteria (red). Magnification ×100. Both stains are suitable for use in fluorescence microscopy, confocal laser scanning microscopy, fluorometry flow and cytometry, and can be employed as a nuclear counter-stain. LIVE/DEAD staining cannot be performed for the direct staining of biofilms on sur-faces because of interference between the stain and polysaccharides of the biofilm matrix and slime [177]. This method’s main downside involves having to observe a statistically relevant por-tion of the sample, which is representative of the whole population. Overall, the method provides only semiquantitative results because the total count of bacterial cells is not pos-sible [178]. Nevertheless, this inconvenience can be prevented by employing imaging soft-ware, such as cellSens®, which can count and measure cells depending on the staining cell.  5.2.4. Different Fluorescents Stainings The application of fluorescent stains to cells and food soil can be useful for the quan-titative analysis of surface cleanability. Thus, the stain combination and working concen-tration are essential for assessing the hygienic conditions of surfaces [179] or testing dis-infectant efficacy against bacteria. Different methods can be followed to visualise and dif-ferentiate cells and organic matter. The staining techniques to measure surface coverage by the two stains by image analysis are highlighted [180] using DAPI and Rhodamine B, DAPI and Fluorescein, or non-specific stains, such as acridine orange, and are also avail-able and specific for particular organic matter [180], and/or for microorganisms [181].  The use of different staining types can be explained by the results obtained in each study after checking the best biofilm and cells staining. These results depend on bacterial species, residual organic matter on surfaces, pH, disinfectant, etc. Whitehead et al. [182] conducted a large study with different dyeing, and concluded that the best combination was DAPI (CAS no. 28718-90-3, λex 340 nm, λem 488 nm, blue) and Rhodamine B (CAS no. 81-88-9, λex 553 nm, λem 627 nm, red), as it allowed the quantitative determination of L. monocytogenes and whey on a surface with fluorescent staining under epifluorescence mi-croscopy. It is also useful for demonstrating the hygienic status of surfaces (Figures 7 and 8). The other tested staining procedures were unsatisfactory, or only slightly so, for dis-tinguishing between viable and dead cells [182].  DAPI staining is suitable for studying cell viability in planktonic situations (initial attachment) and biofilms attached to surfaces (proliferation and growth–maturation) (Fi-gure 6). Nevertheless, coculture biofilm studies need to spatially discriminate between Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

17 of 31

stains by image analysis are highlighted [180] using DAPI and Rhodamine B, DAPI and
Fluorescein, or non-speciﬁc stains, such as acridine orange, and are also available and
speciﬁc for particular organic matter [180], and/or for microorganisms [181].

The use of different staining types can be explained by the results obtained in each
study after checking the best bioﬁlm and cells staining. These results depend on bacterial
species, residual organic matter on surfaces, pH, disinfectant, etc. Whitehead et al. [182]
conducted a large study with different dyeing, and concluded that the best combination
was DAPI (CAS no. 28718-90-3, λex 340 nm, λem 488 nm, blue) and Rhodamine B (CAS no.
81-88-9, λex 553 nm, λem 627 nm, red), as it allowed the quantitative determination of L.
monocytogenes and whey on a surface with ﬂuorescent staining under epiﬂuorescence mi-
croscopy. It is also useful for demonstrating the hygienic status of surfaces (Figures 7 and 8).
The other tested staining procedures were unsatisfactory, or only slightly so, for distin-
guishing between viable and dead cells [182].

DAPI staining is suitable for studying cell viability in planktonic situations (ini-
tial attachment) and bioﬁlms attached to surfaces (proliferation and growth–maturation)
(Figure 6). Nevertheless, coculture bioﬁlm studies need to spatially discriminate between
species, and classic methods, such as crystal violet (CV), SYTO9/propidium iodide, and
DAPI staining are insufﬁcient given their non-speciﬁc nature [183], and selectively bind
to each species. This burden can be overcome by applications, such as mutants express-
ing green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) [182,184], ﬂuorescently labelled antibodies [185], and
ﬂuorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH).

The DAPI/Rhodamine B combination in bioﬁlms offers the best resolution and quan-
tiﬁcation power between cells and organic matter (Figures 6–8). Several authors, such as
Almeida et al. [183], have applied peptide nucleic acid ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization
(PNA FISH) combined with DAPI as a steady method to evaluate, validate, quantify, and
characterise the initial adhesion and bioﬁlm formation of three microorganisms: Salmonella
enterica, Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia coli.

Figure 6. Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm on the stainless steel coupons. Stained with DAPI
(0.1 mg/mL; 10 µL) (Magniﬁcation ×100).

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 32  species, and classic methods, such as crystal violet (CV), SYTO9/propidium iodide, and DAPI staining are insufficient given their non-specific nature [183], and selectively bind to each species. This burden can be overcome by applications, such as mutants expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) [182,184], fluorescently labelled antibodies [185], and flu-orescence in situ hybridisation (FISH).  The DAPI/Rhodamine B combination in biofilms offers the best resolution and quan-tification power between cells and organic matter (Figures 6–8). Several authors, such as Almeida et al. [183], have applied peptide nucleic acid fluorescence in situ hybridization (PNA FISH) combined with DAPI as a steady method to evaluate, validate, quantify, and characterise the initial adhesion and biofilm formation of three microorganisms: Salmo-nella enterica, Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia coli.  Figure 6. Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm on the stainless steel coupons. Stained with DAPI (0.1 mg/mL; 10 µL) (Magnification ×100).  Figure 7. Pseudomonas fluorescens biofilm (24 h) on the stainless steel. Coupons stained with DAPI (0.1 mg/mL; 10 µL) and Rhodamine B (0.1mg/mL; 10 µL) (Magnification × 100). Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

18 of 31

Figure 7. Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens bioﬁlm (24 h) on the stainless steel. Coupons stained with DAPI
(0.1 mg/mL; 10 µL) and Rhodamine B (0.1 mg/mL; 10 µL) (Magniﬁcation ×100).

Figure 8. Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens bioﬁlm (7 days) on the stainless steel. Coupons stained with DAPI
(0.1 mg/mL; 10 µL) and Rhodamine B (0.1 mg/mL; 10 µL) (Magniﬁcation ×100).

5.2.5. Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy (CLSM)

Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) is an optical microscope equipped with a
laser beam that is particularly useful for examining thick samples like microbial bioﬁlms.
Samples are stained with speciﬁc ﬂuorescent dye insofar as the ﬂuorescent light from

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 32  species, and classic methods, such as crystal violet (CV), SYTO9/propidium iodide, and DAPI staining are insufficient given their non-specific nature [183], and selectively bind to each species. This burden can be overcome by applications, such as mutants expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) [182,184], fluorescently labelled antibodies [185], and flu-orescence in situ hybridisation (FISH).  The DAPI/Rhodamine B combination in biofilms offers the best resolution and quan-tification power between cells and organic matter (Figures 6–8). Several authors, such as Almeida et al. [183], have applied peptide nucleic acid fluorescence in situ hybridization (PNA FISH) combined with DAPI as a steady method to evaluate, validate, quantify, and characterise the initial adhesion and biofilm formation of three microorganisms: Salmo-nella enterica, Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia coli.  Figure 6. Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm on the stainless steel coupons. Stained with DAPI (0.1 mg/mL; 10 µL) (Magnification ×100).  Figure 7. Pseudomonas fluorescens biofilm (24 h) on the stainless steel. Coupons stained with DAPI (0.1 mg/mL; 10 µL) and Rhodamine B (0.1mg/mL; 10 µL) (Magnification × 100). Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 32   Figure 8. Pseudomonas fluorescens biofilm (7 days) on the stainless steel. Coupons stained with DAPI (0.1 mg/mL; 10 µL) and Rhodamine B (0.1mg/mL; 10 µL) (Magnification × 100). 5.2.5. Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy (CLSM) Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) is an optical microscope equipped with a laser beam that is particularly useful for examining thick samples like microbial biofilms. Samples are stained with specific fluorescent dye insofar as the fluorescent light from the illuminated spot is collected on the objective and transformed by a photodiode into an electrical signal to be computer-processed [160] given the complexity of the microbial bio-film’s extracellular matrix formed by heterogeneous compounds: polysaccharide, lipids, enzymes, extracellular DNA, and proteins [186].  However, no fluorescence labelling method is currently available for visualising the whole biofilm matrix owing to its different compositions, which depend on each bacte-rium and environmental condition, which means that each matrix component must be individually stained. Unfortunately, however, a general stain for polysaccharides does not exist because the chemical structure of matrix polysaccharides differs between distinct bacteria: Gram + and Gram− [186]. Extracellular DNA has been related to bacterial attachment and early biofilm for-mation stages in many species across the phylogenetic tree. These findings were discov-ered by employing combined stains, such as PicoGreen® and SYTOX®, PI, 1,3-dichloro-7-hydroxy-9,9-dimethyl-2(9H)-acridinone (DDAO), TOTO®-1, TO-PRO® 3. Most reports employed DDAO for staining eDNA in biofilms after the first publications by Allesen-Holm et al. [187] and Conover et al. [188]. Excellent efficacy has been reported for TOTO®-1, SYTOX® Green, while PI provides the most reliable results. TO-PRO®-3 and DDAO are not completely cell-impermeant [189]. With biofilm proteins, which may sometimes be more important than polysaccha-rides, this occurs in cell wall-anchored proteins in Staphylococcus aureus and S. epidermidis, and contributes to aggregation by homophilic interactions [190], or interacts with matrix components that originate from the host, such as fibronectin, collagen, or fibrin [191]. These biofilm proteins can be visualised with strains FilmTracer™ SyPro® [192]. Several proteins also play a key role in the P. aeruginosa biofilm matrix, such as CdrA and others, perform functions that range from nutrient acquisition to protection from oxidative stress [193]. Moreover, serine-protease inhibitor ecotin has been identified as a matrix protein that binds to Psl [194]. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

19 of 31

the illuminated spot is collected on the objective and transformed by a photodiode into
an electrical signal to be computer-processed [160] given the complexity of the microbial
bioﬁlm’s extracellular matrix formed by heterogeneous compounds: polysaccharide, lipids,
enzymes, extracellular DNA, and proteins [186].

However, no ﬂuorescence labelling method is currently available for visualising
the whole bioﬁlm matrix owing to its different compositions, which depend on each
bacterium and environmental condition, which means that each matrix component must
be individually stained. Unfortunately, however, a general stain for polysaccharides does
not exist because the chemical structure of matrix polysaccharides differs between distinct
bacteria: Gram + and Gram− [186].

Extracellular DNA has been related to bacterial attachment and early bioﬁlm formation
stages in many species across the phylogenetic tree. These ﬁndings were discovered by
employing combined stains, such as PicoGreen® and SYTOX®, PI, 1,3-dichloro-7-hydroxy-
9,9-dimethyl-2(9H)-acridinone (DDAO), TOTO®-1, TO-PRO® 3. Most reports employed
DDAO for staining eDNA in bioﬁlms after the ﬁrst publications by Allesen-Holm et al. [187]
and Conover et al. [188]. Excellent efﬁcacy has been reported for TOTO®-1, SYTOX® Green,
while PI provides the most reliable results. TO-PRO®-3 and DDAO are not completely
cell-impermeant [189].

With bioﬁlm proteins, which may sometimes be more important than polysaccharides,
this occurs in cell wall-anchored proteins in Staphylococcus aureus and S. epidermidis, and
contributes to aggregation by homophilic interactions [190], or interacts with matrix com-
ponents that originate from the host, such as ﬁbronectin, collagen, or ﬁbrin [191]. These
bioﬁlm proteins can be visualised with strains FilmTracer™ SyPro® [192]. Several proteins
also play a key role in the P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm matrix, such as CdrA and others, perform
functions that range from nutrient acquisition to protection from oxidative stress [193].
Moreover, serine-protease inhibitor ecotin has been identiﬁed as a matrix protein that binds
to Psl [194].

Nowadays, confocal microscopy is a relevant tool for studying the structure of bioﬁlms
thanks to its excellent real-time visualisation capability of fully hydrated living samples.
The limitation of light microscopy’s spatial resolution is improved by a ﬂuorescence tech-
nique and by coupling CLSM with other imaging techniques [157]. The PNA FISH and
CLSM combination allows the spatial organisation of and changes in speciﬁc members
of complex microbial populations to be studied without disturbing the bioﬁlm struc-
ture [195,196].

5.3. Raman Microscopy (RM)

This non-destructive analytical technique provides ﬁngerprint spectra with the spatial
resolution of an optical microscope [197]. This original technique permits the quantitative,
label-free, non-invasive, and rapid monitoring of biochemical changes in complex bioﬁlm
matrices with high sensitivity and speciﬁcity [198]. Raman spectra studies are characterised
by high speciﬁcity, and by usually revealing sharper clearer bands than IR spectra, and
a small water background. Compared to IR microscopy, excitation with visible light
can be employed in Raman spectroscopy, which allows standard optics to be utilised.
Other advantages include its application to characterise and identify different biological
systems (fungi, bacteria, yeasts) because all biologically associated molecules (e.g., nucleic
acids, proteins, lipids, carbohydrates) exhibit distinct spectral features [197]. Therefore,
Ivleva et al. [197] analysed seven different speciﬁc microorganisms by RM to characterise
microorganisms in bioﬁlms.

Another author evaluated the antibiotic effect on bioﬁlms [198], and the oxidation
of graphene as antibacterial activity against the Pseudomonas putida bioﬁlm with variable
ages [199].

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

20 of 31

5.4. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM)

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) provides useful information about size, shape,
and localisation in the bioﬁlms of single bacteria, and in bioﬁlm formation process steps
about bacterial interactions and EPS production [200]. Surface topography has been
widely discussed as a parameter that inﬂuences microbial adhesion. In line with this, the
experiments by Kouider et al. [201], which employed SEM to establish the effect of stainless
steel surface roughness on Staphylococcus aureus adhesion, revealed that the adhesion level
largely depends on substrate roughness with a maximum at Ra = 0.025 µm and a minimum
at Ra = 0.8 µm. [202]. Mallouki et al. studied the anti-adhesive effect of fucans by SEM and
a MATLAB programme to determine the number and characteristics of adhered cells [203].
SEM has been extensively used to qualitatively observe bioﬁlm disruption owing
to its high resolution, and is usually applied in combination with biological assays of
bioﬁlm removal efﬁciency [204,205]. With SEM images, simple thresholding cannot often
be implemented because bioﬁlm normal surface intensity values are similar due to the
same effective contrast seen by SEM. Rough (textured) biomaterial surfaces complicate
image analyses, and advanced segmentation methods, such as semi-supervised machine-
learning techniques, are usually needed [206]. The bioﬁlm might be segmented from
the surface using the Trainable Weka Segmentation plugin, which utilises a collection of
machine-learning algorithms for segmentation purposes [207].

As with other previously mentioned techniques, SEM is a widely used resource for
conﬁrming the presence of bacteria and the exopolysaccharide matrix when studying
bioﬁlms (Figures 9–11). These studies usually obtain SEM results and are supplemented
with the results of other techniques like confocal [208,209], surface-enhanced Raman scat-
tering (SERS) spectroscopy [210], epiﬂuorescence microscopy (DAPI/Rhodamine B), and
contact plates [211].

Figure 9. Scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) images of stainless steel of 3-day bioﬁlms formed by
Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 21 of 32   Figure 9. Scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) images of stainless steel of 3-day biofilms formed by Pseudomonas fluorescens.  Figure 10. Scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) images of stainless steel of 7-day biofilms formed by Pseudomonas fluorescens. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

21 of 31

Figure 10. Scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) images of stainless steel of 7-day bioﬁlms formed
by Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens.

Figure 11. Scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) images of stainless steel of 7-day bioﬁlms formed
by Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens after treatment with peracetic acid (250 ppm) for 15 min.

5.5. Microbiological Methods

The estimation of the total number of organisms (total viable count) is the most widely
used technique to estimate bioﬁlm viable cells. This count is done on agar media and its
result is colony-forming units (CFU). Based on the serial dilution series approach followed

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 21 of 32   Figure 9. Scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) images of stainless steel of 3-day biofilms formed by Pseudomonas fluorescens.  Figure 10. Scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) images of stainless steel of 7-day biofilms formed by Pseudomonas fluorescens. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW 22 of 32   Figure 11. Scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) images of stainless steel of 7-day biofilms formed by Pseudomonas fluorescens after treatment with peracetic acid (250 ppm) for 15 min. 5.5. Microbiological Methods The estimation of the total number of organisms (total viable count) is the most widely used technique to estimate biofilm viable cells. This count is done on agar media and its result is colony-forming units (CFU). Based on the serial dilution series approach followed to quantify microorganisms, this technique is easy and requires no special equip-ment [158]. Surface samples (stainless steel, plastic, rubber coupons) with biofilms are an-alysed by swab or sonication, and transferred to agar plates. This culture medium can be specific for either the studied species or non-specific species (plate count agar media). Several authors like [212] discovered that some bacterial species can enter a distinct state called the viable, but non-culturable (VBNC) state. These living cells have lost the ability to grow on plate agar media. However, this method has serious drawbacks and limitations [213]: (i) the fraction of detached live cells may not be representative of the initial biofilm population; (ii) a subpopulation of biofilm cells can be viable, but non-cul-turable (VBNC), and cannot be detected by the CFU approach for the CFU estimation of the recovery and quantification of viable biofilm cells. Several authors, such as Cerca et al. [214] and Olivera et al. [215], have proposed applying flow cytometry coupled with a few possible fluorophores as an alternative to the total viable count from biofilms because flow cytometry solves both CFU counting limitations by distinguishing total, dead, and VBNC. The total viable count technique is fundamental for the evolution of biofilm studies, as are studies about the efficacy of industrial disinfectants and increased resistance to the application of different disinfectants. Table 2 shows some results of disinfectant efficacy against several bacterial species.   Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

22 of 31

to quantify microorganisms, this technique is easy and requires no special equipment [158].
Surface samples (stainless steel, plastic, rubber coupons) with bioﬁlms are analysed by
swab or sonication, and transferred to agar plates. This culture medium can be speciﬁc for
either the studied species or non-speciﬁc species (plate count agar media).

Several authors like [212] discovered that some bacterial species can enter a distinct
state called the viable, but non-culturable (VBNC) state. These living cells have lost the
ability to grow on plate agar media. However, this method has serious drawbacks and
limitations [213]: (i) the fraction of detached live cells may not be representative of the initial
bioﬁlm population; (ii) a subpopulation of bioﬁlm cells can be viable, but non-culturable
(VBNC), and cannot be detected by the CFU approach for the CFU estimation of the
recovery and quantiﬁcation of viable bioﬁlm cells. Several authors, such as Cerca et al. [214]
and Olivera et al. [215], have proposed applying ﬂow cytometry coupled with a few
possible ﬂuorophores as an alternative to the total viable count from bioﬁlms because ﬂow
cytometry solves both CFU counting limitations by distinguishing total, dead, and VBNC.
The total viable count technique is fundamental for the evolution of bioﬁlm studies,
as are studies about the efﬁcacy of industrial disinfectants and increased resistance to the
application of different disinfectants. Table 2 shows some results of disinfectant efﬁcacy
against several bacterial species.

Table 2. Resistance of several bacterial species to disinfectant on different material surfaces.

Bacterial Species

Disinfectant

ppm or %

Surfaces

Bioﬁlm. Log
Reduction CFU

Reference

S. aureus
Cronobacter Sakazakii
S. Typhimurium
S. aeruginosa
S. aeruginosa
B. cereus
Enterococcus faecium
E. faecium
Rhodococcus erythropolis
R. erythropolis
R. erythropolis
R. erythropolis
Sphingomonas sp.
Sphingomonas sp.
Sphingomonas sp.
Sphingomonas sp.
Methylobacterium
rhodesianum
M. rhodesianum
M. rhodesianum
M. rhodesianum
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes

Sodium hypochlorite
Sodium hypochlorite
Sodium hypochlorite
Sodium hypochlorite
Sodium hypochlorite
NaOH and HNO3, 65 ◦C
Sodium hypochlorite
Peracetic acid
Alkyl amine
Peracetic acid
Sodium hypochlorite
QAC
Alkyl amine
Peracetic acid
Sodium hypochlorite
QAC

Alkyl amine

Peracetic acid
Sodium hypochlorite
QAC
Sodium hydroxide
QAC
Sodium hypochlorite
Peracetic acid
Sodium hydroxide
QAC
Sodium hypochlorite
Peracetic acid
Sodium hydroxide
QAC
Sodium hypochlorite
Peracetic acid
Sodium hydroxide
QAC
Sodium hypochlorite
Peracetic acid
Benzalkonium chloride
Benzalkonium chloride

250
250
250
250, 500
750, 1000
1%
100
300
1–1.3%
0.2%
0.5–1%
200
1–1.3%
0.2%
0.5–1%
200

1–1.3%

0.2%
0.5–1%
200
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
0.5%
100–10,000
10

Stainless steel/PP
Stainless steel/PP
Stainless steel/PP
Stainless steel 316
Stainless steel 316
CIP dairy
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Stainless steel

Stainless steel

Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Rubber
Rubber
Rubber
Rubber
Polypropylene
Polypropylene
Polypropylene
Polypropylene
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Stainless steel
Aluminium foil
Aluminium foil
Aluminium foil
Aluminium foil
Polystyrene
Polystyrene

4.5/4.4
3.7/3.9
5.82/6.1
2/100%
100%/100%
2
3
4
>5
0.48
4.51
>5
>5
>5
>5
>5

4.48

>5
0.01
0.64
0.66
1.72
1.79
5.10
1.20
2.57
2.74
6.62
1
4.06
1.97
6.63
0.52
5.1
3.84
6.54
1–7
100%

Colony-forming units (CFU); cleaning-in-place (CIP); polypropylene (PP); quaternary ammonium compounds (QAC).

[212]
[216]
[216]
[217]
[217]
[218]
[98]
[98]
[103]
[103]
[103]
[103]
[103]
[103]
[103]
[103]

[103]

[103]
[103]
[103]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[112]
[170]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

23 of 31

6. Conclusions

Bioﬁlms have become a major environmental microbiology concern in the food indus-
try over the last 30 years. This topic is prominent due to the potential for contamination of
food from bioﬁlms; they are responsible for more than 20% of food poisoning cases and for
being up to 1000-fold more tolerant to antibiotics than their planktonic counterparts [219].
Many bacterial species have the ability to form bioﬁlms, such as microbial subsistences
(when faced with hostilities from the environment), antibiotics, and disinfectants. For these
reasons, cleaning and disinfecting in the food industry must bring about changes that
favour eliminating bioﬁlms, because once they form, the resulting costs and risks will
be very high. As previously discovered in many publications, the ability of bacteria
to form bioﬁlms is greater than the discoveries. Thus, they must be eliminated. The
advancement of new, non-destructive technologies (e.g., laser dissection) to study bioﬁlms
and their results should be applied to bioﬁlm diagnoses in the food industry, to better
understand the physiological anatomy of microbes and bioﬁlms, and future applications in
the food industry.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.S., C.C., D.R., F.R., and A.R.; methodology, A.S., C.C.,
D.R., F.R., and A.R.; software, A.S., C.C., D.R., F.R., and A.R.; validation, A.S., C.C., D.R., F.R., and
A.R.; formal analysis, A.S., C.C., D.R., F.R., and A.R.; investigation, A.S., C.C., D.R., F.R., and A.R.;
resources, A.S., C.C., D.R., F.R., and A.R.; data curation, A.S., C.C., D.R., F.R., and A.R.; writing—
original draft preparation, A.S., C.C., D.R., F.R., and A.R.; writing—review and editing, A.S., C.C.,
D.R., F.R., and A.R.; visualization, A.S., C.C., D.R., F.R., and A.R.; supervision, A.S., C.C., D.R., F.R.,
and A.R.; project administration, A.S., C.C., D.R., F.R., and A.R. All authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.

Acknowledgments: The authors are very grateful to their families and friends for all of the support
they provided.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.

Satpathy, S.; Sen, S.K.; Pattanaik, S.; Raut, S. Review on bacterial bioﬁlm: An universal cause of contamination. Biocatal. Agric.
Biotechnol. 2016, 7, 56–66. [CrossRef]
Flemming, H.C.; Wingender, J. The bioﬁlm matrix. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2010, 8, 623–633. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

2.
3. Hall-Stoodley, L.J.; Costerton, W.; Stoodley, P. Bacterial bioﬁlms: From the natural environment to infectious diseases. Nat. Rev.

4.

5.

6.

Microbiol. 2004, 2, 95–108. [CrossRef]
Acker, H.V.; Dijck, P.V.; Coenye, P.V. Molecular mechanisms of antimicrobial tolerance and resistance in bacterial and fungal
bioﬁlms. Trends Microbiol. 2014, 22, 326–333. [CrossRef]
Alvarez-Ordóñez, A.L.; Coughlan, M.; Briandet, R.; Cotter, P.D. Bioﬁlms in food processing environments: Challenges and
opportunities. Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 2019, 10, 173–195. [CrossRef]
Brooks, J.D.; Flint, S.H. Bioﬁlms in the food industry: Problems and potential solutions. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2008, 43,
2163–2176. [CrossRef]

7. Møretrø, M.; Langsrud, S. Residential bacteria on surfaces in the food industry and their implications for food safety and quality.

8.

Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2017, 16, 1022–1041. [CrossRef]
Yuan, L.; Sadiq, F.A.; Burmølle, M.; Liu, T.; He, G. Insights into bacterial milk spoilage with particular emphasis on the roles of
heat-stable enzymes, bioﬁlms, and quorum sensing. J. Food Prot. 2018, 81, 1651–1660. [CrossRef]
Srey, S.; Jahid, I.K.; Ha, S.D. Bioﬁlm formation in food industries: A food safety concern. Food Control 2013, 31, 572–585. [CrossRef]
9.
10. Anwar, H.; Strap, J.L.; Costerton, J.W. Establishment of aging bioﬁlms: Possible mechanism of bacterial resistance to antimicrobial

therapy. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1992, 36, 1347. [CrossRef]

11. Costerton, J.W.; Ellis, B.; Lam, K.; Johnson, F.; Khoury, A.E. Mechanism of electrical enhancement of efﬁcacy of antibiotics in

killing bioﬁlm bacteria. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1994, 38, 2803–2809. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

24 of 31

12.

Simoes, M.; Simoes, L.; Vieira, M. A review of current and emergent bioﬁlm control strategies. LWT Food Sci. Technol. 2010, 43,
573–583. [CrossRef]
Fung, D.Y.C. Rapid methods and automation in microbiology: A review. Ir. J. Agric. Food Res. 2000, 39, 301–307. [CrossRef]

13.
14. Bouix, M.; Leveau, J.Y. Les applications de la cytometrie en ﬂux en microbiologie. L’Eurobiologiste 2002, 36, 31–43.
15. Holah, J.T.; Taylor, J.H.; Dawson, D.J.; Hall, K.E. Biocide use in the food industry and the disinfectant resistance of persistent

strains of Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia Coli. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2002, 92, 111S–120S. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

16. Kassa, H. An outbreak of Norwalk-like viral gastroenteritis in a frequently penalized food service operation: A case for mandatory

training of food handlers in safety and hygiene. J. Environ. Health. 2001, 64.

17. González-Rivas, F.; Ripolles-Avila, C.; Fontecha-Umaña, F.; Ríos-Castillo, A.G.; Rodríguez-Jerez, J.J. Bioﬁlms in the Spotlight:

Detection, Quantiﬁcation, and Removal Methods. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2018, 17, 1261–1276. [CrossRef]
Shi, X.; Zhu, X. Bioﬁlm formation and food safety in food industries. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2009, 20, 407–413. [CrossRef]
18.
19. Anand, S.; Singh, D.; Avadhanula, M.; Marka, S. Development and control of bacterial bioﬁlms on dairy processing membranes.

Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2014, 13, 18–33. [CrossRef]

20. Rabin, N.; Zheng, Y.; Opoku-Temeng, C.; Du, Y.; Bonsu, E.; Sintim, H.O. Bioﬁlm formation mechanisms and targets for developing

antibioﬁlm agents. Future Med. Chem. 2015, 7, 493–512. [CrossRef]

21. Lindsay, D.; von Holy, A. What food safety professionals should know about bacterial bioﬁlms. Br. Food J. 2006, 108, 27–37.

[CrossRef]

22. Tang, L.; Pillai, S.; Revsbech, N.P.; Schramm, A.; Bischoff, C.; Meyer, R.L. Bioﬁlm retention on surfaces with variable roughness

and hydrophobicity. Biofouling 2011, 27, 111–121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

23. Van Houdt, R.; Michiels, C.W. Bioﬁlm formation and the food industry, a focus on the bacterial outer surface. J. Appl. Microbiol.

2010, 109, 1117–1131. [CrossRef]

24. Govaert, M.; Smet, C.; Baka, M.; Janssens, T.; Van Impe, J. Inﬂuence of incubation conditions on the formation of model bioﬁlms
by Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella Typhimurium on abiotic surfaces. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2018, 125, 1890–1900. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

25. Makovcova, J.; Babak, V.; Kulich, P.; Masek, J.; Slany, M.; Cincarova, L. Dynamics of mono- and dual-species bioﬁlm formation

and interactions between Staphylococcus aureus and gramnegative bacteria. Microb. Biotechnol. 2017, 10, 819–832. [CrossRef]

26. Araújo, E.A.; de Andrade, N.J.; da Silva, L.H.M.; de Carvalho, A.F.; da Silva, C.A.; Ramos, A.M. Control of microbial adhesion as

a strategy for food and bioprocess technology. Food Bioprocess Technol. 2010, 3, 321–332. [CrossRef]

27. Dhowlaghar, N.; Bansal, M.; Schilling, M.W.; Nannapaneni, R. Scanning electron microscopy of Salmonella bioﬁlms on various

28.

food-contact surfaces in catﬁsh mucus. Food Microbiol. 2018, 74, 143–150. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Jindal, S.; Anand, S.; Metzger, L.; Amamcharla, J. A comparison of bioﬁlm development on stainless steel and modiﬁed-surface
plate heat exchangers during a 17-h milk pasteurization run. J. Dairy Sci. 2018, 101, 2921–2926. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

29. Gomes, L.C.; Silva, L.N.; Simoes, M.; Melo, L.F.; Mergulhao, F.J. Escherichia coli adhesion, bioﬁlm development and antibiotic

susceptibility on biomedical materials. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 2015, 103, 1414–1423. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

30. Veluz, G.A.; Pitchiah, S.; Alvarado, C.Z. Attachment of Salmonella serovars and Listeria monocytogenes to stainless steel and plastic

31.

conveyor belts. Poult. Sci. 2012, 91, 2004–2010. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Iñiguez-Moreno, M.M.; Gutiérrez-Lomelí, A.; Avila-Novoa, M.G. Kinetics of bioﬁlm formation by pathogenic and spoilage
microorganisms under conditions that mimic the poultry, meat, and egg processing industries. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2019, 303,
32–41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

32. Dutra, T.V.; Fernandes, M.D.; Perdoncini, M.R.F.G.; dos Anjos, M.M.; Abreu Filho, B.A.D. Capacity of Escherichia coli and
Staphylococcus aureus to produce bioﬁlm on stainless steel surfaces in the presence of food residues. J. Food Process. Preserv. 2018,
42, e13574. [CrossRef]

33. Duanis-Assaf, D.; Steinberg, D.; Chai, Y.; Shemesh, M. The LuxS based quorum sensing governs lactose induced bioﬁlm formation

by Bacillus subtilis. Front. Microbiol. 2016, 6, 1517. [CrossRef]

34. Xue, T.; Chen, X.; Shang, F. Effects of lactose and milk on the expression of bioﬁlm-associated genes in Staphylococcus aureus

35.

strains isolated from a dairy cow with mastitis. J. Dairy Sci. 2014, 97, 6129–6134. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Somerton, B.; Lindsay, D.; Palmer, J.; Brooks, J.; Flint, S. Changes in sodium, calcium, and magnesium ion concentrations that
inhibit Geobacillus bioﬁlms have no effect on Anoxybacillus ﬂavithermus bioﬁlms. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2015, 81, 5115–5122.
[CrossRef]

36. Wang, R.; Kalchayanand, N.; Bono, J.L. Sequence of colonization determines the composition of mixed bioﬁlms by Escherichia coli

O157:H7 and O111:H8 strains. J. Food Prot. 2015, 78, 1554–1559. [CrossRef]

37. Abdallah, M.; Khelissa, O.; Ibrahim, A.; Benoliel, C.; Heliot, L.; Dhulster, P.; Chihib, N.E. Impact of growth temperature and
surface type on the resistance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus bioﬁlms to disinfectants. Int. J. Food Microbiol.
2015, 214, 38–47. [CrossRef]

38. Colagiorgi, A.; Bruini, I.; Di Ciccio, P.A.; Zanardi, E.; Ghidini, S.; Ianieri, A. Listeria Monocytogenes Bioﬁlms in the Wonderland

of Food Industry. Pathogens 2017, 6, 41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

39. Bottone, E.J. Bacillus Cereus, a Volatile Human Pathogen. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 2010, 23, 382–398. [CrossRef]
40. Grigore-Gurgu, L.; Bucur, F.I.; Borda, D.; Alexa, E.A.; Neagu, C.; Nicolau, A.I. Bioﬁlms Formed by Pathogens in Food and Food

Processing Environments. In Bacterial Bioﬁlms; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2019.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

25 of 31

41. Klanˇcnik, A.; Šimunovi´c, K.; Sterniša, M.; Rami´c, D.; Smole Možina, S.; Bucar, F. Anti-Adhesion Activity of Phytochemicals to

Prevent Campylobacter Jejuni Bioﬁlm Formation on Abiotic Surfaces. Phytochem. Rev. 2020. [CrossRef]

42. EFSA; European Food Safety Authority and European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (EFSA and ECDC). The

European Union One Health 2018 Zoonoses Report. EFSA J. 2019, 17, e05926.

43. Chlebicz, A.; ´Sli ˙zewska, K. Campylobacteriosis, Salmonellosis, Yersiniosis, and Listeriosis as Zoonotic Foodborne Diseases: A

Review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018, 15, 863. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

44. Galié, S.; García-Gutiérrez, C.; Miguélez, E.M.; Villar, C.J.; Lombó, F. Bioﬁlms in the Food Industry: Health Aspects and Control

Methods. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 898. [CrossRef]

45. CDC. Centre for Disease Control, USA: Listeria (Listeriosis). 2017. Available online: https://www.cdc.gov/listeria/outbreaks/

index.html (accessed on 29 November 2020).

46. Rothrock, M.J.; Davis, M.L.; Locatelli, A.; Bodie, A.; McIntosh, T.G.; Donaldson, J.R.; Ricke, S.C. Listeria Occurrence in Poultry

Flocks: Detection and Potential Implications. Front. Vet. Sci. 2017, 4. [CrossRef]

47. Nguyen, H.D.N.; Yang, Y.S.; Yuk, H.G. Bioﬁlm Formation of Salmonella Typhimurium on Stainless Steel and Acrylic Surfaces as

Affected by Temperature and PH Level. LWT Food Sci. Technol. 2014, 55, 383–388. [CrossRef]

48. Duguid, J.P.; Anderson, E.S.; Campbell, I. Fimbriae and Adhesive Properties in Salmonellae. J. Pathol. Bacteriol. 1966, 92, 107–137.

[CrossRef]

49. Giaouris, E.; Heir, E.; Desvaux, M.; Hébraud, M.; Møretrø, T.; Langsrud, S.; Doulgeraki, A.; Nychas, G.-J.; Kaˇcániová, M.; Czaczyk,
K.; et al. Intra- and Inter-Species Interactions within Bioﬁlms of Important Foodborne Bacterial Pathogens. Front. Microbiol. 2015,
6. [CrossRef]

50. Kadariya, J.; Smith, T.C.; Thapaliya, D. Staphylococcus Aureus and Staphylococcal Food-Borne Disease: An Ongoing Challenge

in Public Health. Biomed Res. Int. 2014. [CrossRef]

51. Hammer, B.K.; Bassler, B.L. Quorum sensing controls bioﬁlm formation in Vibrio cholerae. Mol. Microbiol. 2003, 50, 101–114.

[CrossRef]

52. Otto, M. Staphylococcal infections: Mechanisms of bioﬁlm maturation and detachment as critical determinants of pathogenicity.

Annu. Rev. Med. 2013, 64, 175–188. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

53. Morgan, R.; Kohn, S.; Hwang, S.H.; Hassett, D.J.; Sauer, K. BdlA, a chemotaxis regulator essential for bioﬁlm dispersion in

54.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Bacteriol. 2006, 188, 7335–7343. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Somerton, B.; Flint, S.; Palmer, J.; Brooks, J.; Lindsay, D. Preconditioning with cations increases the attachment of Anoxybacillus
ﬂavithermus and Geobacillus species to stainless steel. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2013, 79, 4186–4190. [CrossRef]

55. Houry, A.; Briandet, R.; Aymerich, S.; Gohar, M. Involvement of Motility and Flagella in Bacillus Cereus Bioﬁlm Formation.

Microbiology 2010, 156, 1009–1018. [CrossRef]

56. Téllez, S. Bioﬁlms and their impact on food industry. In VISAVET Outreach Journal; Complutense University: Madrid, Spain, 2010.
57. Tram, G.; Day, C.J.; Korolik, V. Bridging the Gap: A Role for Campylobacter Jejuni Bioﬁlms. Microorganisms 2020, 8, 452. [CrossRef]
58. Gould, L.H.; Mody, R.K.; Ong, K.L.; Clogher, P.; Cronquist, A.B.; Garman, K.N.; Lathrop, S.; Medus, C.; Spina, N.L.; Webb,
T.H.; et al. Increased recognition of non-O157 Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli infections in the United States during
2000–2010: Epidemiologic features and comparison with E. coli O157 infections. Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 2013, 10, 453–460.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

59. Lim, E.S.; Koo, O.K.; Kim, M.J.; Kim, J.S. Bio-enzymes for inhibition and elimination of Escherichia coli O157: H7 bioﬁlm and

their synergistic effect with sodium hypochlorite. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 9920. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

60. Lee, J.; Bansal, T.; Jayaraman, A.; Bentley, W.E.; Wood, T.K. Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia Coli Bioﬁlms Are Inhibited by

7-Hydroxyindole and Stimulated by Isatin. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2007, 73, 4100–4109. [CrossRef]

61. Milillo, S.R.; Friedly, E.C.; Saldivar, J.C.; Muthaiyan, A.; O’bryan, C.; Crandall, P.G.; Johnson, M.G.; Ricke, S.C. A Review of the
Ecology, Genomics, and Stress Response of Listeria Innocua and Listeria Monocytogenes. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2012, 52,
712–725. [CrossRef]

62. Chmielewski, R.A.N.; Frank, J.F. Bioﬁlm Formation and Control in Food Processing Facilities. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2003,

2, 22–32. [CrossRef]

63. Raheem, D. Outbreaks of Listeriosis Associated with Deli Meats and Cheese: An Overview. Aims Microbiol. 2016, 2, 230–250.

[CrossRef]

64. Lemon, K.P.; Higgins, D.E.; Kolter, R. Flagellar Motility Is Critical for Listeria Monocytogenes Bioﬁlm Formation. J. Bacteriol. 2007,

189, 4418–4424. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

65. Giannella, R.A.; Baron, S.; Albrecht, T.; Castro, G.; Couch, R.B.; Davis, C.P.; Dianzani, F.; Mcginnis, M.R.; Niesel, D.W.; Woods,
G.W. Salmonella. In Baron’s Medical Microbiology, 4th ed.; University of Texas Medical Branch: Galveston, TX, USA, 1996.
66. Lamas, A.; Miranda, J.M.; Regal, P.; Vázquez, B.; Franco, C.M.; Cepeda, A. A Comprehensive Review of Non-Enterica Subspecies

67.

of Salmonella Enterica. Microbiol. Res. 2018, 60–73. [CrossRef]
´Cwiek, K.; Bugla-Płosko ´nska, G.; Wieliczko, A. Salmonella Bioﬁlm Development: Structure and Signiﬁcance. Postepy Hig. I Med.
Dosw. 2019, 937–943. [CrossRef]

68. Wang, H.; Ding, S.; Wang, G.; Xu, X.; Zhou, G. In situ characterization and analysis of Salmonella bioﬁlm formation under meat
processing environments using a combined microscopic and spectroscopic approach. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2013, 167, 293–302.
[CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

26 of 31

69.

Schelin, J.; Susilo, Y.; Johler, S. Expression of Staphylococcal Enterotoxins under Stress Encountered during Food Production and
Preservation. Toxins 2017, 9, 401. [CrossRef]

70. Amina, M.; Bensoltane, A. Review of Pseudomonas Attachment and Bioﬁlm Formation in Food Industry Pseudomonas Bioﬁlm;

Chemotaxis and Motility View Project. Poult. Fish Wildl. Sci. 2015, 3, 1. [CrossRef]

71. Golovlev, E.L. The Mechanism of Formation of Pseudomonas Aeruginosa Bioﬁlm, a Type of Structured Population. Microbiology

2002, 249–254. [CrossRef]

72. Carrascosa, C.; Millán, R.; Jaber, J.R.; Lupiola, P.; del Rosario-Quintana, C.; Mauricio, C.; Sanjuán, E. Blue Pigment in Fresh Cheese

Produced by Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens. Food Control 2015, 54, 95–102. [CrossRef]

73. Wu, P.; Guo, Y.; Golly, M.K.; Ma, H.; He, R.; Luo, S.; Zhang, C.; Zhang, L.; Zhu, J. Feasibility Study on Direct Fermentation of
Soybean Meal by Bacillus Stearothermophilus under Non-sterile Conditions. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2019, 99, 3291–3298. [CrossRef]
Flint, S.; Palmer, J.; Bloemen, K.; Brooks, J.; Crawford, R. The Growth of Bacillus Stearothermophilus on Stainless Steel. J. Appl.
Microbiol. 2001, 90, 151–157. [CrossRef]

74.

75. Palmer, J.S.; Flint, S.H.; Schmid, J.; Brooks, J.D. The Role of Surface Charge and Hydrophobicity in the Attachment of Anoxybacillus

76.

Flavithermus Isolated from Milk Powder. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2010, 37, 1111–1119. [CrossRef]
Strejc, J.; Kyselova, L.; Cadkova, A.; Matoulkova, D.; Potocar, T.; Branyik, T. Experimental Adhesion of Geobacillus Stearother-
mophilus and Anoxybacillus Flavithermus to Stainless Steel Compared with Predictions from Interaction Models. Chem. Pap.
2020, 74, 297–304. [CrossRef]

77. Murphy, P.M.; Lynch, D.; Kelly, P.M. Growth of Thermophilic Spore Forming Bacilli in Milk during the Manufacture of Low Heat

78.

Powders. Int. J. Dairy Technol. 1999, 52, 45–50. [CrossRef]
Sadiq, F.A.; Flint, S.; Yuan, L.; Li, Y.; Liu, T.J.; He, G.Q. Propensity for Bioﬁlm Formation by Aerobic Mesophilic and Thermophilic
Spore Forming Bacteria Isolated from Chinese Milk Powders. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2017, 262, 89–98. [CrossRef]

79. Burgess, S.A.; Brooks, J.D.; Rakonjac, J.; Walker, K.M.; Flint, S.H. The Formation of Spores in Bioﬁlms of Anoxybacillus Flavithermus.

J. Appl. Microbiol. 2009, 107, 1012–1018. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

80. Paradh, A.D.; Mitchell, W.J.; Hill, A.E. Occurrence of Pectinatus and Megasphaera in the Major UK Breweries. J. Inst. Brew. 2011,

117, 498–506. [CrossRef]

81. Lee, S.Y.; Mabee, M.S.; Jangaard, N.O. Pectinatus, a New Genus of the Family Bacteroidaceae. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 1978, 28,

82.

582–594. [CrossRef]
Sterniša, M.; Klanˇcnik, A.; Smole Možina, S. Spoilage Pseudomonas bioﬁlm with Escherichia coli protection in ﬁsh meat at 5 ◦C. J.
Sci. Food Agric. 2019, 99, 4635–4641. [CrossRef]

83. Mizan, M.F.R.; Jahid, I.K.; Ha, S.D. Microbial Bioﬁlms in Seafood: A Food-Hygiene Challenge. Food Microbiol. 2015, 41–55.

[CrossRef]

84. Toushik, S.H.; Mizan, M.F.R.; Hossain, M.I.; Ha, S.D. Fighting with Old Foes: The Pledge of Microbe-Derived Biological Agents to
Defeat Mono- and Mixed-Bacterial Bioﬁlms Concerning Food Industries. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2020, 413–425. [CrossRef]
85. González, J.E.; Keshavan, N.D. Messing with Bacterial Quorum Sensing. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2006, 70, 859–875. [CrossRef]

[PubMed]

86. Zupanˇciˇc, J.; Raghupathi, P.K.; Houf, K.; Burmølle, M.; Sørensen, S.J.; Gunde-Cimerman, N. Synergistic interactions in microbial
bioﬁlms facilitate the establishment of opportunistic pathogenic Fungi in household dishwashers. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 21.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

87. Pammi, M.; Liang, R.; Hicks, J.; Mistretta, T.A.; Versalovic, J. Bioﬁlm extracellular DNA enhances mixed species bioﬁlms of

Staphylococcus epidermidis and Candida Albicans. BMC Microbiol. 2013, 13, 257. [CrossRef]

88. Donlan, R.M.; Piede, J.A.; Heyes, C.D.; Sanii, L.; Murga, R.; Edmonds, P.; El-Sayed, I.; El-Sayed, M.A. Model System for Growing
and Quantifying Streptococcus Pneumoniae Bioﬁlms in Situ and in Real Time. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2004, 70, 4980–4988.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

89. Heukelekian, H.; Heller, A. Relation between food concentration and surface forbacterial growth. J. Bacteriol. 1940, 40, 547–558.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

90. Zobell, C.E. The effect of solid surfaces on bacterial activity. J. Bacteriol. 1943, 46, 39–56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91. Characklis, W.G. Attached microbial growths-II. Frictional resistance due to microbial slimes. Water Res. 1973, 7, 1249–1258.

[CrossRef]

92. Moreno-García, J.; García-Martinez, T.; Moreno, J.; Mauricio, J.C.; Ogawa, M.; Luong, P.; Bisson, L.F. Impact of yeast ﬂocculation
and bioﬁlm formation on yeast-fungus coadhesion in a novel immobilization system. Am. J. Enol. Vitic. 2018, 69, 278–288.
[CrossRef]

93. Ogawa, M.; Bisson, L.F.; García-Martínez, T.; Mauricio, J.C.; Moreno-García, J. New Insights on Yeast and Filamentous Fungus
Adhesion in a Natural Co-Immobilization System: Proposed Advances and Applications in Wine Industry. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 2019, 103, 4723–4731. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

94. Mowat, E.; Lang, S.; Williams, C.; McCulloch, E.; Jones, B.; Ramage, G. Phase-dependent antifungal activity against Aspergillus

fumigatus developing multicelluar ﬁlamentous bioﬁlms. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 2008, 62, 1281–1284. [CrossRef]

95. Mowat, E.; Butcher, J.; Lang, S.; Williams, C.; Ramage, G. Development of a simple model for studying the effects of antifungal

agents on multicellular communities of Aspergillus fumigatus. J. Med. Microbiol. 2007, 56, 1205–1212. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

27 of 31

96. European Hygienic Engineering and Design Group (EHEDG). Hygienic Design Principles, 3rd ed.; EHEDG Guidelines; European

97.

Hygienic Engineering & Design Group: Naarden, The Netherlands, 2018.
Fortin, N.D. Regulatory Requirements in the United States on Hygiene Control in the Design, Construction, and Renovation of Food
Processing Factories. Chapter 4 in Hygiene Control in the Design, Construction and Renovation of Food Processing Factories; Lelieveld,
H.L.M., Holah, J., Eds.; Woodhead Publishing Ltd., 2011. Available online: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2497425 (accessed on
25 November 2020).

98. Plieth, W. Electrochemistry for Materials Science; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2008; Chapter 12.
99. Rosado-Castro, M.; da Silva Fernandes, M.; Kabuki, D.Y.; Kuaye, A.Y. Bioﬁlm Formation of Enterococcus Faecium on Stainless Steel

Surfaces: Modeling and Control by Disinfection Agents. J. Food Process Eng. 2018, 41, 1–9. [CrossRef]

100. Rosenberg, M.; Kjelleberg, S. Hydrophobic interactions in bacterial adhesion. Adv. Microb. Ecol. 1986, 9, 353–393.
101. Corpe, W.A. Microbial surface components involved in adsorption of microorganisms onto surfaces. In Adsorption of Microorgan-

isms to Surfaces; Bitton, G., Marshall, K.C., Eds.; John Wiley & Sons: New York, NY, USA, 1980; pp. 105–144.

102. Peña, W.E.L.; Andrade, N.J.; Soares, N.F.F.; Alvarenga, V.O.; Rodrigues Junior, S.; Granato, D.; Zuniga, A.D.G.; de Souza Sant’Ana,
A. Modeling Bacillus cereus adhesion on stainless steel surface as affected by temperature, pH and time. Int. Dairy J. 2014, 34,
153–158. [CrossRef]

103. Furukawa, S.; Akiyoshi, Y.; Komoriya, M.; Ogihara, H.; Morinaga, Y. Removing Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli bioﬁlms

on stainless steel by cleaning-in-place (CIP) cleaning agents. Food Control 2010, 21, 669–672. [CrossRef]

104. Bore, E.; Langsrud, S. Characterization of Micro-Organisms Isolated from Dairy Industry after Cleaning and Fogging Disinfection

with Alkyl Amine and Peracetic Acid. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2005, 98, 96–105. [CrossRef]

105. Hawkins, C.L.; Davies, M.J. Hypochlorite-induced oxidation of proteins in plasma: Formation of chloramines and nitrogen-

centred radicals and their role in protein fragmentation. Biochem. J. 1999, 340, 539–548. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

106. Nightingale, Z.D.; Lancha, A.H., Jr.; Handelman, S.K.; Dolnikowski, G.G.; Busse, S.C.; Dratz, E.A.; Blumberg, J.B.; Handelman,
G.J. Relative reactivity of lysine and other peptide-bound amino acids to oxidation by hypochlorite. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2000,
29, 425–433.

107. Heinecke, J.W.; Li, W.; Daehnke, H.; Goldstein, J.A. Dityrosine, a speciﬁc marker of oxidation, is synthesized by the
myeloperoxidase-hydrogen peroxide system of human neutrophils and macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 1993, 268, 4069–4077.
[CrossRef]

108. Spickett, C.M.; Jerlich, A.; Panasenko, O.M.; Arnhold, J.; Pitt, A.R.; Stelmaszynska, T.; Schaur, R.J. The reactions of hypochlorous
acid, the reactive oxygen species produced by myeloperoxidase, with lipids. Acta Biochim. Pol. 2000, 47, 889–899. [CrossRef]
109. Prutz, W.A. Interactions of hypochlorous acid with pyrimidine nucleotides, and secondary reactions of chlorinated pyrimidines

with GSH, NADH, and other substrates. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 1998, 349, 183–191. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

110. Fukuzaki, S. Mechanisms of actions of sodium hypochlorite in cleaning and disinfection processes. Biocontrol Sci. 2006, 11,

147–157. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

111. Fernandes, M.S.; Fujimoto, G.; Souza, L.P.; Kabuki, D.Y.; Silva, M.J.; Kuaye, A.Y. Dissemination of Enterococcus faecalis and
Enterococcus faecium in a ricotta processing plant and evaluation of pathogenic and antibiotic resistance proﬁles. J. Food Sci. 2015,
80, M765–M775. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

112. Skowron, K.; Hulisz, K.; Gry ´n, G.; Olszewska, H.; Wiktorczyk, N.; Paluszak, Z. Comparison of selected disinfectants efﬁciency

against Listeria monocytogenes bioﬁlm formed on various surfaces. Int. Microbiol. 2018, 21, 23–33. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

113. Ibusquisa, P.A.; Herrera, J.J.R.; Cabo, M.L. Resistance to benzalkonium chloride, peracetic acid and nisin during formation of

mature bioﬁlms by List. Monocytogenes. Food Microbiol. 2011, 28, 418–428. [CrossRef]

114. Eterpi, M.; McDonnell, G.; Thomas, V. Disinfection efﬁcacy against parvoviruses compared with reference viruses. J. Hosp. Infect.

2009, 73, 64–70. [CrossRef]

115. Langsrud, S.; Sidhu, M.S.; Heir, E.; Holck, A.L. Bacterial Disinfectant Resistance—A Challenge for the Food Industry. Int.

Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 2003, 51, 283–290. [CrossRef]

116. Rasimus, S.; Kolari, M.; Rita, H.; Hoornstra, D.; Salkinoja-Salonen, M. Bioﬁlm-Forming Bacteria with Varying Tolerance to

Peracetic Acid from a Paper Machine. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2011, 38, 1379–1390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

117. Russell, A.D. Similarities and differences in the responses of microorganisms to biocides. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 2003, 52,

750–763. [CrossRef]

118. Block, S.S. Peroxygen compounds. In Disinfection, Sterilization, and Preservation, 5th ed.; Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: Philadel-

phia, PA, USA, 2001; pp. 185–204.

119. Marquis, R.E.; Rutherford, G.C.; Faraci, M.M.; Shin, S.Y. Sporicidal action of peracetic acid and protective eVects of transition

metal ions. J. Ind. Microbiol. 1995, 15, 486–492. [CrossRef]

120. Dunkin, N.; Weng, S.; Schwab, K.J.; McQuarrie, J.; Bell, K.; Jacangelo, J.G. Comparative inactivation of murine norovirus and MS2
bacteriophage by peracetic acid and monochloramine in municipal secondary wastewater efﬂuent. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2017, 51,
2972–2981136. [CrossRef]

121. Zhang, C.; Brown, P.J.B.; Miles, R.J.; White, T.A.; Grant, D.A.G.; Stalla, D.; Hu, Z. Inhibition of Regrowth of Planktonic and Bioﬁlm

Bacteria after Peracetic Acid Disinfection. Water Res. 2019, 149, 640–649. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

122. Bridier, A.; Briandet, R.; Thomas, V.; Dubois-Brissonnet, F. Comparative biocidal activity of peracetic acid, benzalkonium chloride

and ortho-phthalaldehyde on 77 bacterial strains. J. Hosp. Infect. 2011, 78, 208–213. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

28 of 31

123. Vázquez-Sánchez, D.; Cabo, M.L.; Ibusquiza, P.S.; Rodríguez-Herrera, J.J. Bioﬁlm-forming ability and resistance to industrial

disinfectants of Staphylococcus aureus isolated from ﬁshery products. Food Control. 2014, 39, 8–16. [CrossRef]

124. Mah, T.F.C.; O’Toole, G.A. Mechanisms of bioﬁlm resistance to antimicrobial agents. Trends Microbiol. 2001, 9, 34–39. [CrossRef]
125. Mari´c, S.; Vraneš, J. Characteristics and Signiﬁcance of Microbial Bioﬁlm Formation. Period. Biol. 2007, 109, 115–121.
126. Beveridge, T.J.; Makin, S.A.; Kadurugamuwa, J.L.; Li, Z. Interactions between bioﬁlms and the environment. FEMS Microbiol. Rev.

1997, 20, 291–303. [CrossRef]

127. Flemming, H.C. Bioﬁlms and environmental protection. Water Sci. Technol. 1993, 27, 1–10. [CrossRef]
128. Da Costa, J.B.; Rodgher, S.; Daniel, L.A.; Espíndola, E.L.G. Toxicity on aquatic organisms exposed to secondary efﬂuent disinfected

with chlorine, peracetic acid, ozone and UV radiation. Ecotoxicology 2014, 23, 1803–1813. [CrossRef]
129. Ferriol-González, C.; Domingo-Calap, P. Phages for Bioﬁlm Removal. Antibiotics 2020, 9, 268. [CrossRef]
130. Hiom, S.J.; Lowe, C.; Oldcorne, M. Assessment of surface bioburden during hospital aseptic processing. Int. J. Pharm. Pract. 2003,

11, R62.

131. Wang, Y.; Tan, X.; Xi, C.; Phillips, K.S. Removal of Staphylococcus aureus from skin using a combination antibioﬁlm approach.

NPJ Bioﬁlms Microbiomes. 2018, 4, 1–9. [CrossRef]

132. Vaidya, M.Y.; McBain, A.J.; Butler, J.A.; Banks, C.E.; Whitehead, K.A. Antimicrobial efﬁcacy and synergy of metal ions against
Enterococcus faecium, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Acinetobacter baumannii in planktonic and bioﬁlm phenotypes. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 1–9.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

133. Miao, J.; Liang, Y.; Chen, L.; Wang, W.; Wang, J.; Li, B.; Li, L.; Chen, D.; Xu, Z. Formation and development of Staphylococcus

bioﬁlm: With focus on food safety. J. Food Saf. 2017, 37, e12358. [CrossRef]

134. Cacciatore, F.A.; Brandelli, A.; Malheiros, P.D.S. Combining natural antimicrobials and nanotechnology for disinfecting food

surfaces and control microbial bioﬁlm formation. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2020, 1–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

135. Iacumin, L.; Manzano, M.; Comi, G. Phage Inactivation of Listeria Monocytogenes on San Daniele Dry-Cured Ham and

Elimination of Bioﬁlms from Equipment and Working Environments. Microorganisms 2016, 4, 4. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

136. Greer, G.G. Bacteriophage control of foodborne bacteria. J. Food Prot. 2011, 68, 1102–1111. [CrossRef]
137. Soni, K.A.; Nannapaneni, R. Bacteriophage signiﬁcantly reduces L. monocytogenes on raw salmon ﬁllet tissue. J. Food Prot. 2010,

73, 32–38. [CrossRef]

138. Gironés, R.R.G.; Simmons, M.M. Evaluation of the safety and efﬁcacy of ListexTM P100 for reduction of pathogens on different

ready-to-eat (RTE) food products. EFSA J. 2016, 14, 4565.

139. Marsden, J.L. The Effectiveness of Listex P100 in Reducing Listeria monocytogenes in RTE Food; Food Science Institute, Kansas State
University; Available online: https://www.foodsafetynews.com/ﬁles/2013/05/Listex-P100-Final-Report-1-2.pdf (accessed on 1
December 2020).

140. Choi, N.Y.; Baek, S.Y.; Yoon, J.H.; Choi, M.R.; Kang, D.H.; Lee, S.Y. Efﬁcacy of aerosolized hydrogen peroxide-based sanitizer on

the reduction of pathogenic bacteria on a stainless steel surface. Food Control. 2012, 27, 57–63. [CrossRef]

141. Park, S.H.; Cheon, H.L.; Park, K.H.; Chung, M.S.; Choi, S.H.; Ryu, S.; Kang, D.H. Inactivation of bioﬁlm cells of foodborne

pathogen by aerosolized sanitizers. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2012, 154, 130–134. [CrossRef]

142. Del Pozo, J.L.; Patel, R. The challenge of treating bioﬁlm-associated bacterial infections. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2007, 82, 204–209.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

143. Anghel, I.; Holban, A.M.; Grumezescu, A.M.; Andronescu, E.; Ficai, A.; Anghel, A.G.; Maganu, M.; Lazˇar, V.; Chiﬁriuc, M.C.
Modiﬁed wound dressing with phyto-nanostructured coating to prevent staphylococcal and pseudomonal bioﬁlm development.
Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2012, 7, 1–8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

144. De Kievit, T.R.; Iglewski, B.H. Bacterial quorum sensing in pathogenic relationships. Infect. Immun. 2000, 68, 4839–4849. [CrossRef]
145. Sajjan, U.; Moreira, J.; Liu, M.; Humar, A.; Chaparro, C.; Forstner, J.; Keshavjee, S. A novel model to study bacterial adherence
to the transplanted airway: Inhibition of Burkholderia cepacia adherence to human airway by dextran and xylitol. J. Heart Lung
Transplant. 2012, 23, 1382–1391. [CrossRef]

146. Singh, P.K.; Schaefer, A.L.; Parsek, M.R.; Moninger, T.O.; Welsh, M.J.; Greenberg, E.P. Quorum-sensing signals indicate that cystic

ﬁbrosis lungs are infected with bacterial bioﬁlms. Nature 2000, 407, 762–764. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

147. Xiong, F.; Zhao, X.; Wen, D.; Li, Q. Effects of N-acyl-homoserine lactones-based quorum sensing on bioﬁlm formation, sludge
characteristics, and bacterial community during the start-up of bioaugmented reactors. Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 735, 139449.
[CrossRef]

148. Schuster, M.; Joseph Sexton, D.; Diggle, S.P.; Peter Greenberg, E. Acyl-homoserine lactone quorum sensing: From evolution to

application. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2013, 67, 43–63. [CrossRef]

149. Wang, J.; Liu, Q.; Ma, S.; Hu, H.; Wu, B.; Zhang, X.X.; Ren, H. Distribution characteristics of N-acyl homoserine lactones during
the moving bed bioﬁlm reactor bioﬁlm development process: Effect of carbon/nitrogen ratio and exogenous quorum sensing
signals. Bioresour. Technol. 2019, 289, 121591. [CrossRef]

150. Maddela, N.R.; Sheng, B.; Yuan, S.; Zhou, Z.; Villamar-Torres, R.; Meng, F. Roles of quorum sensing in biological wastewater

treatment: A critical review. Chemosphere 2019, 221, 616–629. [CrossRef]

151. Pu, H.; Xu, Y.; Sun, D.-W.; Wei, Q.; Li, X. Optical nanosensors for bioﬁlm detection in the food industry: Principles, applications

and challenges. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2020, 1–18. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

29 of 31

152. Jayan, H.; Pu, H.; Sun, D.-W. Recent development in rapid detection techniques for microorganism activities in food matrices

using bio-recognition: A review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2020, 95, 233–246. [CrossRef]

153. Lv, M.; Liu, Y.; Geng, J.; Kou, X.; Xin, Z.; Yang, D. Engineering nanomaterials-based biosensors for food safety detection. Biosens.

Bioelectron. 2018, 106, 122–128. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

154. Zhang, P.; Chen, Y.P.; Qiu, J.H.; Dai, Y.Z.; Feng, B. Imaging the microprocesses in bioﬁlm matrices. Trends Biotechnol. 2019, 37,

214–226. [CrossRef]

155. Ivleva, N.P.; Kubryk, P.; Niessner, R. Raman microspectroscopy, surface-enhanced Raman scattering microspectroscopy, and
stable-isotope Raman microspectroscopy for bioﬁlm characterization. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2017, 409, 4353–4375. [CrossRef]
156. Vanegas, D.C.; Gomes, C.L.; Cavallaro, N.D.; Giraldo-Escobar, D.; McLamore, E.S. Emerging biorecognition and transduction
schemes for rapid detection of pathogenic bacteria in food. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2017, 16, 1188–1205. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

157. Pantanella, F.; Valenti, P.; Natalizi, T.; Passeri, D.; Berlutti, F. Analytical Techniques to Study Microbial Bioﬁlm on Abiotic Surfaces:

Pros and Cons of the Main Techniques Currently in Use. Ann. Ig. Med. Prev. E Comunità 2013, 25, 31–42. [CrossRef]

158. Azeredo, J.; Azevedo, N.F.; Briandet, R.; Cerca, N.; Coenye, T.; Costa, A.R.; Desvaux, M.; Di Bonaventura, G.; Hébraud, M.;

Jaglic, Z.; et al. Critical Review on Bioﬁlm Methods. Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 2017, 43, 313–351. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

159. Huang, Y.; Chakraborty, S.; Liang, H. Methods to Probe the Formation of Bioﬁlms: Applications in Foods and Related Surfaces.

Anal. Methods 2020, 12, 416–432. [CrossRef]

160. Nijland, R.; Hall, M.J.; Burgess, J.G. Dispersal of bioﬁlms by secreted, matrix degrading, bacterial DNase. PLoS ONE 2010, 5,

e15668. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

161. Jamal, M.; Ahmad, W.; Andleeb, S.; Jalil, F.; Imran, M.; Nawaz, M.A.; Hussain, T.; Ali, M.; Raﬁq, M.; Kamil, M.A. Bacterial Bioﬁlm

and Associated Infections. J. Chin. Med. Assoc. 2018, 81, 7–11. [CrossRef]

162. Ansari, M.A.; Khan, H.M.; Khan, A.A.; Cameotra, S.S.; Alzohairy, M.A. Anti-bioﬁlm efﬁcacy of silver nanoparticles against MRSA

and MRSE isolated from wounds in a tertiary care hospital. Indian J. Med. Microbiol. 2015, 33, 101. [CrossRef]

163. Lawrence, J.R.; Neu, T.R. Confocal laser scanning microscopy for analysis of microbial bioﬁlms. Methods Enzymol. 1999, 310,

131–144. [PubMed]

164. Kania, R.E.; Lamers, G.E.; Vonk, M.J.; Huy, P.T.B.; Hiemstra, P.S.; Bloemberg, G.V.; Grote, J.J. Demonstration of bacterial cells and

glycocalyx in bioﬁlms on human tonsils. Arch. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg. 2007, 133, 115–121. [CrossRef]

165. Ommen, P.; Zobek, N.; Meyer, R.L. Quantiﬁcation of Bioﬁlm Biomass by Staining: Non-Toxic Safranin Can Replace the Popular

Crystal Violet. J. Microbiol. Methods 2017, 141, 87–89. [CrossRef]

166. Stepanovi´c, S.; Vukovi´c, D.; Daki´c, I.; Savi´c, B.; Švabi´c-Vlahovi´c, M. A Modiﬁed Microtiter-Plate Test for Quantiﬁcation of

Staphylococcal Bioﬁlm Formation. J. Microbiol. Methods 2000, 40, 175–179. [CrossRef]

167. Doll, K.; Jongsthaphongpun, K.L.; Stumpp, N.S.; Winkel, A.; Stiesch, M. Quantifying Implant-Associated Bioﬁlms: Comparison

of Microscopic, Microbiologic and Biochemical Methods. J. Microbiol. Methods 2016, 130, 61–68. [CrossRef]

168. Extremina, C.I.; Costa, L.; Aguiar, A.I.; Peixe, L.; Fonseca, A.P. Optimization of processing conditions for the quantiﬁcation of

enterococci bioﬁlms using microtitreplates. J. Microbiol. Methods. 2010. [CrossRef]

169. Stiefel, P.; Rosenberg, U.; Schneider, J.; Mauerhofer, S. Is bioﬁlm removal properly assessed? Comparison of different quantiﬁcation

methods in a 96-well plate system. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2016, 100, 4135–4145. [CrossRef]

170. Romanova, N.A.; Gawande, P.V.; Brovko, L.Y.; Grifﬁths, M.W. Rapid Methods to Assess Sanitizing Efﬁcacy of Benzalkonium

Chloride to Listeria Monocytogenes Bioﬁlms. J. Microbiol. Methods 2007, 71, 231–237. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

171. Cell Staining. 2019. Available online: https://www.dojindo.com/ (accessed on 2 December 2020).
172. Burton, E.; Yakandawala, N.; LoVetri, K.; Madhyastha, M.S. A Microplate Spectroﬂuorometric Assay for Bacterial Bioﬁlms. J. Ind.

Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2007, 34, 1–4. [CrossRef]

173. Deng, Y.; Wang, L.; Chen, Y.; Long, Y. Optimization of Staining with SYTO 9/Propidium Iodide: Interplay, Kinetics and Impact

on Brevibacillus Brevis. BioTechniques 2020, 69, 89–99. [CrossRef]

174. Shi, L.; Gunther, S.; Hubschmann, T.; Wick, L.Y.; Harms, H.; Muller, S. Limits of propidium iodide as a cell viability indicator for

environmental bacteria. Cytom. A 2007, 71, 592–598. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

175. Munukka, E.; Leppäranta, O.; Korkeamäki, M.; Vaahtio, M.; Peltola, T.; Zhang, D.; Hupa, L.; Ylänen, H.; Salonen, J.I.; Viljanen,
M.K.; et al. Bactericidal effects of bioactive glasses on clinically important aerobic bacteria. J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 2008, 19,
27–32. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

176. Larrosa, M.; Truchado, P.; Espin, J.C.; Tomás-Barberán, F.A.; Allende, A.; García-Conesa, M.T. Evaluation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(PAO1) adhesion to human alveolar epithelial cells A549 using SYTO 9 dye. Mol. Cell. Probes. 2012, 26, 121–126. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

177. Maukonen, J.; Mattila-Sandholm, T.; Wirtanen, G. Metabolic Indicators for Assessing Bacterial Viability in Hygiene Sampling

Using Cells in Suspension and Swabbed Bioﬁlm. LWT Food Sci. Technol. 2000, 33, 225–233. [CrossRef]

178. Tawakoli, P.N.; Al-Ahmad, A.; Hoth-Hannig, W.; Hannig, M.; Hannig, C. Comparison of different live/dead stainings for
detection and quantiﬁcation of adherent microorganisms in the initial oral bioﬁlm. Clin. Oral Investig. 2013, 17, 841–850.
[CrossRef]

179. Verran, J. Biofouling in food processing: Bioﬁlm or biotransfer potential? Food Bioprod. Process. 2002, 80, 292–298. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

30 of 31

180. Verran, J.; Whitehead, K.A. Assessment of organic materials and microbial components on hygienic surfaces. Food Bioprod. Process.

2006, 84, 260–264. [CrossRef]

181. Declerck, P.; Verelst, L.; Duvivier, L.; Van Damme, A.; Ollevier, F. A detection method for Legionella spp. in (cooling) water:

Fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) on whole bacteria. Water Sci. Technol. 2003, 47, 143–146. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

182. Whitehead, K.A.; Benson, P.; Verran, J. Differential ﬂuorescent staining of Listeria monocytogenes and a whey food soil for

quantitative analysis of surface hygiene. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2009, 135, 75–80. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

183. Almeida, C.; Azevedo, N.F.; Santos, S.; Keevil, C.W.; Vieira, M.J. Discriminating Multi-Species Populations in Bioﬁlms with

Peptide Nucleic Acid Fluorescence in Situ Hybridization (PNA FISH). PLoS ONE 2011, 6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

184. Hansen, S.K.; Rainey, P.B.; Haagensen, J.A.; Molin, S. Evolution of species interactions in a bioﬁlm community. Nature 2007, 445,

533–536. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

185. Gu, F.; Lux, R.; Du-Thumm, L.; Stokes, I.; Kreth, J.; Anderson, M.H.; Wong, D.T.; Wolinsky, L.; Sullivan, R.; Shi, W. In situ and
noninvasive detection of speciﬁc bacterial species in oral bioﬁlms using ﬂuorescently labeled monoclonal antibodies. J. Microbiol.
Methods 2005, 62, 145–160. [CrossRef]

186. Schlafer, S.; Meyer, R.L. Confocal Microscopy Imaging of the Bioﬁlm Matrix. J. Microbiol. Methods. 2017, 138, 50–59. [CrossRef]
187. Allesen-Holm, M.; Barken, K.B.; Yang, L.; Klausen, M.; Webb, J.S.; Kjelleberg, S.; Molin, S.; Givskov, M.; Tolker-Nielsen, T. A
characterization of DNA release in Pseudomonas aeruginosa cultures and bioﬁlms. Mol. Microbiol. 2006, 59, 1114–1128. [CrossRef]
188. Conover, M.S.; Mishra, M.; Deora, R. Extracellular DNA is essential for maintaining Bordetella bioﬁlm integrity on abiotic

surfaces and in the upper respiratory tract of mice. PLoS ONE 2011, 6, e16861. [CrossRef]

189. Okshevsky, M.; Meyer, R.L. Evaluation of ﬂuorescent stains for visualizing extracellular DNA in bioﬁlms. J. Microbiol. Methods

2014, 105, 102–104. [CrossRef]

190. Schaeffer, C.R.; Woods, K.M.; Longo, G.M.; Kiedrowski, M.R.; Paharik, A.E.; Büttner, H.; Christner, M.; Boissy, R.J.; Horswill,
A.R.; Rohde, H.; et al. Accumulation-associated protein enhances Staphylococcus epidermidis bioﬁlm formation under dynamic
conditions and is required for infection in a rat catheter model. Infect. Immun. 2015, 83, 214–226. [CrossRef]

191. Büttner, H.; Mack, D.; Rohde, H. Structural basis of Staphylococcus epidermidis bioﬁlm formation: Mechanisms and molecular

interactions. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2015, 5, 14. [CrossRef]

192. Frank, K.L.; Patel, R. Poly-N-acetylglucosamine is not a major component of the extracellular matrix in bioﬁlms formed by

icaADBC-positive Staphylococcus lugdunensis isolates. Infect. Immun. 2007, 75, 4728–4742. [CrossRef]

193. Toyofuku, M.; Roschitzki, B.; Riedel, K.; Eberl, L. Identiﬁcation of proteins associated with the Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm

extracellular matrix. J. Proteome Res. 2012, 11, 4906–4915. [CrossRef]

194. Tseng, B.S.; Reichhardt, C.; Merrihew, G.E.; Araujo-Hernandez, S.A.; Harrison, J.J.; MacCoss, M.J.; Parsek, M.R. A bioﬁlm
matrix-associated protease inhibitor protects Pseudomonas aeruginosa from proteolytic attack. MBio 2018, 9. [CrossRef]
195. Dige, I.; Nyengaard, J.R.; Kilian, M.; Nyvad, B. Application of stereological principles for quantiﬁcation of bacteria in intact dental

bioﬁlms. Oral Microbiol. Immunol. 2009, 24, 69–75. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

196. Malic, S.; Hill, K.E.; Hayes, A.; Percival, S.L.; Thomas, D.W.; Williams, D.W. Detection and identiﬁcation of speciﬁc bacteria
in wound bioﬁlms using peptide nucleic acid ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (PNA FISH). Microbiology 2009, 155, 2603–2611.
[CrossRef]

197. Ivleva, N.P.; Wagner, M.; Horn, H.; Niessner, R.; Haisch, C. Towards a Nondestructive Chemical Characterization of Bioﬁlm

Matrix by Raman Microscopy. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2009, 393, 197–206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

198. Jung, G.B.; Nam, S.W.; Choi, S.; Lee, G.-J.; Park, H.-K. Evaluation of Antibiotic Effects on Pseudomonas aeruginosa Bioﬁlm Using

Raman Spectroscopy and Multivariate Analysis. Biomed. Opt. Express 2014, 5, 3238. [CrossRef]

199. Fallatah, H.; Elhaneid, M.; Ali-Boucetta, H.; Overton, T.W.; El Kadri, H.; Gkatzionis, K. Antibacterial effect of graphene oxide
(GO) nano-particles against Pseudomonas putida bioﬁlm of variable age. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2019, 26, 25057–25070. [CrossRef]
200. Vuotto, C.; Donelli, G. Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy of Bioﬁlm-Growing Bacteria Involved in Nosocomial
Infections. In Microbial Bioﬁlms. Methods in Molecular Biology (Methods and Protocols); Donelli, G., Ed.; Humana Press: New York,
NY, USA, 2014. [CrossRef]

201. Kouider, N.; Hamadi, F.; Mallouki, B.; Bengoram, J.; Mabrouki, M.; Zekraoui, M.; Ellouali, M.; Latrache, H. Effect of stainless steel

surface roughness on Staphylococcus aureus adhesion. Int. J. Pure Appl. Sci. 2010, 4, 17.

202. Mallouki, B.; Latrache, H.; Mabrouki, M.; Outzourhit, A.; Hamadi, F.; Muller, D.; Ellouali, M. The inhibitory effect of fucans on

adhesion and production of slime of Staphylococcus Aureus. Microbiol. Hygiène Aliment. 2007, 19, 6471.

203. El Abed, S.; Ibnsouda, S.K.; Latrache, H.; Hamadi, F. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and environmental SEM: Suitable tools

for study of adhesion stage and bioﬁlm formation. In Scanning Electron Microscopy; Intechopen: London, UK, 2012.

204. Agarwal, A.; Jern Ng, W.; Liu, Y. Removal of bioﬁlms by intermittent low-intensity ultrasonication triggered bursting of

microbubbles. Biofouling 2014, 30, 359–365. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

205. Fricke, K.; Koban, I.; Tresp, H.; Jablonowski, L.; Schröder, K.; Kramer, A.; Weltmann, K.D.; von Woedtke, T.; Kocher, T. Atmospheric
Pressure Plasma: A High-Performance Tool for the Efﬁcient Removal of Bioﬁlms. PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e42539. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
206. Chan, T.F.; Esedoglu, S.; Nikolova, M. Algorithms for ﬁnding global minimizers of image segmentation and denoising models.

Siam. J. Appl. Math. 2002, 66, 1632–1648. [CrossRef]

207. Vyas, N.; Sammons, R.L.; Addison, O.; Dehghani, H.; Walmsley, A.D. A quantitative method to measure bioﬁlm removal efﬁciency

from complex biomaterial surfaces using SEM and image analysis. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 32694. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 2014

31 of 31

208. Hu, H.; Johani, K.; Gosbell, I.B.; Jacombs, A.S.W.; Almatroudi, A.; Whiteley, G.S.; Deva, A.K.; Jensen, S.; Vickery, K. Intensive care
unit environmental surfaces are contaminated by multidrug-resistant bacteria in bioﬁlms: Combined results of conventional
culture, pyrosequencing, scanning electron microscopy, and confocal laser microscopy. J. Hosp. Infect. 2015, 91, 35–44. [CrossRef]
209. Mohmmed, S.A.; Vianna, M.E.; Penny, M.R.; Hilton, S.T.; Mordan, N.; Knowles, J.C. Confocal laser scanning, scanning electron,
and transmission electron microscopy investigation of Enterococcus faecalis bioﬁlm degradation using passive and active sodium
hypochlorite irrigation within a simulated root canal model. Microbiologyopen 2017, 6, e00455. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

210. Bodelón, G.; Montes-García, V.; Costas, C.; Pérez-Juste, I.; Pérez-Juste, J.; Pastoriza-Santos, I.; Liz-Marzán, L.M. Imaging bacterial

interspecies chemical interactions by surface-enhanced Raman scattering. ACS Nano 2017, 11, 4631–4640. [CrossRef]

211. Whitehead, K.A.; Saubade, F.; Akhidime, I.D.; Liauw, C.M.; Benson, P.S.; Verran, J. The detection and quantiﬁcation of food
components on stainless steel surfaces following use in an operational bakery. Food Bioprod. Process. 2019, 116, 258–267. [CrossRef]
212. Xu, H.S.; Roberts, N.; Singleton, F.L.; Attwell, R.W.; Grimes, D.J.; Colwell, R.R. Survival and viability of nonculturable Escherichia

coli andVibrio cholerae in the estuarine and marine environment. Microb. Ecol. 1982, 8, 313–323. [CrossRef]

213. Li, L.; Mendis, N.; Trigui, H.; Oliver, J.D.; Faucher, S.P. The importance of the viable but non-culturable state in human bacterial

pathogens. Front. Microbiol. 2014, 5, 258. [CrossRef]

214. Cerca, F.; Andrade, F.; França, Â.; Andrade, E.B.; Ribeiro, A.; Almeida, A.A.; Cerca, N.; Pier, G.; Azeredo, J.; Vilanova, M.
Staphylococcus epidermidis bioﬁlms with higher proportions of dormant bacteria induce a lower activation of murine macrophages.
J. Med. Microbiol. 2011, 60, 1717–1724. [CrossRef]

215. Oliveira, F.; Lima, C.A.; Brás, S.; França, Â.; Cerca, N. Evidence for interand intraspecies bioﬁlm formation variability among a

small group of coagulase-negative staphylococci. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2015, 362. [CrossRef]

216. Bayoumi, M.A.; Kamal, R.M.; Abd El Aal, S.F.; Awad, E.I. Assessment of a regulatory sanitization process in Egyptian dairy
plants in regard to the adherence of some food-borne pathogens and their bioﬁlms. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2012, 158, 225–231.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

217. Khaddouj, A.; Fatima, H.; Rachida, M.; Hassan, L.; Khadija, A.; Youssef, N.; Mustapha, M. Evaluation of sodium hypochlorite

efﬁciency on the elimination of Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm using two methods. Russ. Open Med. J. 2019, 8, e0302.

218. Bremer, P.J.; Fillery, S.; McQuillan, A.J. Laboratory scale Clean-In-Place (CIP) studies on the effectiveness of different caustic and

acid wash steps on the removal of dairy bioﬁlms. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2006, 106, 254–262. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

219. Lebeaux, D.; Ghigo, J.M.; Beloin, C. Bioﬁlm-related infections: Bridging the gap between clinical management and fundamental

aspects of recalcitrance toward antibiotics. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2014, 78, 510–543. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

