Review
Bioﬁlms: The Microbial “Protective Clothing” in
Extreme Environments

Wen Yin, Yiting Wang, Lu Liu and Jin He *

State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
* Correspondence: hejin@mail.hzau.edu.cn; Tel.: 86-27-87280670; Fax: 86-27-87280670

Received: 31 May 2019; Accepted: 11 July 2019; Published: 12 July 2019

Abstract: Microbial bioﬁlms are communities of aggregated microbial cells embedded in a
self-produced matrix of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS). Bioﬁlms are recalcitrant to extreme
environments, and can protect microorganisms from ultraviolet (UV) radiation, extreme temperature,
extreme pH, high salinity, high pressure, poor nutrients, antibiotics, etc., by acting as “protective
clothing”. In recent years, research works on bioﬁlms have been mainly focused on bioﬁlm-associated
In this review, we focus instead on
infections and strategies for combating microbial bioﬁlms.
the contemporary perspectives of bioﬁlm formation in extreme environments, and describe the
fundamental roles of bioﬁlm in protecting microbial exposure to extreme environmental stresses
and the regulatory factors involved in bioﬁlm formation. Understanding the mechanisms of bioﬁlm
formation in extreme environments is essential for the employment of beneﬁcial microorganisms and
prevention of harmful microorganisms.

Keywords: microorganism; extreme environment; bioﬁlm; extracellular polymeric substances (EPS);
adaptative mechanism

1. Introduction

In the natural world, there exist some extremely harsh environments [1,2], such as high-intensity
ultraviolet (UV) radiation, high or low temperature, high alkalinity, high acidity, high salinity,
high pressure, poor nutrients, plentiful antibiotics, etc. Previously, these environments are considered
to be life prohibiting; however, after further exploration, these extreme environments are in fact
found to contain abundant microorganisms. They are not only alive, but also thrive well in extreme
environments that were formerly thought to be inhospitable to life [3]. Microorganisms that are able to
survive in these extreme environments are called extremophiles [4,5], which include radiation-resistant
extremophiles, thermophiles, psychrophiles, alkaliphiles, acidophiles, halophiles, piezophiles, etc.
Each microorganism surviving under these extreme conditions exhibits its speciﬁc resistant mechanism,
among which the role of bioﬁlm is considered to be crucial [6,7].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423; doi:10.3390/ijms20143423

www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms

 International Journal of Molecular Sciences(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

2 of 18

A bioﬁlm is an organized aggregate of microorganisms living within a self-produced matrix of
extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) that is attached to a biotic or abiotic surface [8–10]. It is
considered to be one of the most widely distributed and successful modes of life on the Earth [11], and in
most natural environments, a bioﬁlm is the predominating microbial lifestyle [12]. Indeed, fossilized
bioﬁlms have been found in a 3.2 billion-year-old deep-sea volcanogenic massive sulﬁde deposit from
the Pilbara Craton of Australia [13], and in a 3.3 to 3.4 billion-year-old hydrothermally inﬂuenced
sediment from the Barberton greenstone belt of South Africa [14]. Similar bioﬁlm structures have also
been identiﬁed in modern hydrothermal systems, such as deep-sea vents [15] and hot springs [16].
These data suggest that the ability to form bioﬁlms can protect microorganisms from extreme
environments [17,18]. Further studies have also shown that bioﬁlms can increase microbial resistances
against UV radiation [19], extreme temperature and pH [20–22], high salinity [23], high pressure [24],
poor nutrients [25], various antibiotics [26], etc. The resistance of bioﬁlms against extreme environments
seems to be capable of creating a suitable habitat for microbial populations, makes the exchange of
substances and information between microorganisms more convenient, and is thus a self-protective
mechanism for the growth of microorganisms [27]. The morphological structures of microorganisms
in the bioﬁlm and their sensitivity to environmental factors as well as biological characteristics
are substantially diﬀerent to planktonic microorganisms [28]. Such a three-dimensional structure
of bioﬁlm seems to provide a natural barrier and protective layer to microorganisms; in addition,
the immobile microorganisms in EPS are more resistant to extreme environments than planktonic
microorganisms [29].

In the current review, we try to provide contemporary perspectives on the molecular mechanism
of bioﬁlm formation, the roles of bioﬁlm in extreme environments, and the various signaling cascades
involved in bioﬁlm formation.
It aims at providing new ideas for the employment of beneﬁcial
microorganisms, as well as the prevention and control of harmful microorganisms.

2. Microbial Bioﬁlms

Bioﬁlm formation is a complex and dynamic process, in which organized communities of
microorganisms are encased in a matrix of EPS that cluster microbial cells together [30,31]. EPS are
mainly composed of polysaccharides, proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids (RNA and extracellular DNA
(eDNA)) [32,33], which form a highly hydrated polar mixture that contributes to the overall scaﬀold
and three-dimensional structure of a bioﬁlm.

The bioﬁlm lifestyle is an endless cycle, and the process of bioﬁlm formation can be summarized
into the following ﬁve major stages based on the previous studies [34–36] (Figure 1): (I) Attachment:
microorganisms are reversibly adsorbed to a surface via weak interactions (such as the van
der Waals forces) with a biotic or abiotic surface [37]; (II) Colonization: microorganisms are
irreversibly attached to the surface via stronger hydrophilic/hydrophobic interactions by ﬂagella,
lipopolysaccharides, exopolysaccharides, collagen-binding adhesive proteins, etc. [38,39];
pili,
(III) Development: the multilayered cells are accumulated by proliferation, and EPS are produced and
secreted [32,40]; (IV) Maturation: stable formation of a three-dimensional community that contains
channels to eﬀectively distribute nutrients and signaling molecules within the bioﬁlm [41]; (V) Active
dispersal: microbial cells are detached in clumps or separated, due to interactions with either intrinsic
or extrinsic factors, with the disseminated cells subsequently colonizing on other locations [42].

In this dynamic process, speciﬁc enzymes are involved in degrading and reconﬁguring bioﬁlm,
resulting not only in partial matrix degradation, but also the active dispersal of bioﬁlm and subsequent
surface recolonization [7]. Attachment is the beginning for a bioﬁlm formation, while active dispersal
is not the end, but also the creation of the next round of bioﬁlm formation. The continuous recirculation
of bioﬁlm gives the microorganisms the ability to adapt to various extreme environments.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

3 of 18

Figure 1. Model of microbial bioﬁlm formation. Bioﬁlm formation consists of ﬁve distinct stages: I.
Attachment: microbial cells adhere to the surface reversibly. II. Colonization: microbial cells attach
to the surface irreversibly via ﬂagella, pili, exopolysaccharides, etc. III. Development: multilayered
cells accumulate and produce extracellular polymeric substances (EPS). IV. Mature: stable formation
of a three-dimensional community. V. Active dispersal: microorganisms are disseminated from the
aggregate bioﬁlm and return to a planktonic state.

3. Bioﬁlms in Extreme Environments

Bioﬁlm formation is a unique growth mode chosen by microorganisms in response to various
environmental stresses, and previous studies have shown that the ability to form bioﬁlms is important
for microorganisms to grow in various extreme environments (Figure 2).

Figure 2. A schematic representation of the bioﬁlm function. Bioﬁlm formation can increase the
resistances of microorganisms to various extreme environments.

3.1. Bioﬁlm in UV Radiation

The solar UV radiation comprises three types based on the range of wavelength: UV-A (320
to 400 nm), UV-B (290 to 320 nm), and UV-C (100 to 290 nm) [43]. Besides their implication in
damaging proteins and membranes, UV-A can damage DNA by generating reactive oxygen species
to induce single-strand DNA breaks [44,45], while UV-B can be absorbed directly by DNA to alter or

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 18  microbial resistances against UV radiation [19], extreme temperature and pH [20–22], high salinity [23], high pressure [24], poor nutrients [25], various antibiotics [26], etc. The resistance of biofilms against extreme environments seems to be capable of creating a suitable habitat for microbial populations, makes the exchange of substances and information between microorganisms more convenient, and is thus a self-protective mechanism for the growth of microorganisms [27]. The morphological structures of microorganisms in the biofilm and their sensitivity to environmental factors as well as biological characteristics are substantially different to planktonic microorganisms [28]. Such a three-dimensional structure of biofilm seems to provide a natural barrier and protective layer to microorganisms; in addition, the immobile microorganisms in EPS are more resistant to extreme environments than planktonic microorganisms [29]. In the current review, we try to provide contemporary perspectives on the molecular mechanism of biofilm formation, the roles of biofilm in extreme environments, and the various signaling cascades involved in biofilm formation. It aims at providing new ideas for the employment of beneficial microorganisms, as well as the prevention and control of harmful microorganisms. 2. Microbial Biofilms Biofilm formation is a complex and dynamic process, in which organized communities of microorganisms are encased in a matrix of EPS that cluster microbial cells together [30,31]. EPS are mainly composed of polysaccharides, proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids (RNA and extracellular DNA (eDNA)) [32,33], which form a highly hydrated polar mixture that contributes to the overall scaffold and three-dimensional structure of a biofilm. The biofilm lifestyle is an endless cycle, and the process of biofilm formation can be summarized into the following five major stages based on the previous studies [34–36] (Figure 1): (I) Attachment: microorganisms are reversibly adsorbed to a surface via weak interactions (such as the van der Waals forces) with a biotic or abiotic surface [37]; (II) Colonization: microorganisms are irreversibly attached to the surface via stronger hydrophilic/hydrophobic interactions by flagella, pili, lipopolysaccharides, exopolysaccharides, collagen-binding adhesive proteins, etc. [38,39]; (III) Development: the multilayered cells are accumulated by proliferation, and EPS are produced and secreted [32,40]; (IV) Maturation: stable formation of a three-dimensional community that contains channels to effectively distribute nutrients and signaling molecules within the biofilm [41]; (V) Active dispersal: microbial cells are detached in clumps or separated, due to interactions with either intrinsic or extrinsic factors, with the disseminated cells subsequently colonizing on other locations [42]. I. AttachmentII. ColonizationIII. DevelopmentIV. MatureV. Active dispersalBiofilm formation proteinlipidnucleic acidpolysaccharidemicroorganism Figure 1. Model of microbial biofilm formation. Biofilm formation consists of five distinct stages: I. Attachment: microbial cells adhere to the surface reversibly. II. Colonization: microbial cells attach to Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 18  the surface irreversibly via flagella, pili, exopolysaccharides, etc. III. Development: multilayered cells accumulate and produce extracellular polymeric substances (EPS). IV. Mature: stable formation of a three-dimensional community. V. Active dispersal: microorganisms are disseminated from the aggregate biofilm and return to a planktonic state. In this dynamic process, specific enzymes are involved in degrading and reconfiguring biofilm, resulting not only in partial matrix degradation, but also the active dispersal of biofilm and subsequent surface recolonization [7]. Attachment is the beginning for a biofilm formation, while active dispersal is not the end, but also the creation of the next round of biofilm formation. The continuous recirculation of biofilm gives the microorganisms the ability to adapt to various extreme environments. 3. Biofilms in Extreme Environments Biofilm formation is a unique growth mode chosen by microorganisms in response to various environmental stresses, and previous studies have shown that the ability to form biofilms is important for microorganisms to grow in various extreme environments (Figure 2). pHtemperatureUVpressuredesiccationsalinity…O2Environmental parameters, QS, c-di-GMP, cAMP… antibiotics Figure 2. A schematic representation of the biofilm function. Biofilm formation can increase the resistances of microorganisms to various extreme environments. 3.1. Biofilm in UV Radiation The solar UV radiation comprises three types based on the range of wavelength: UV-A (320 to 400 nm), UV-B (290 to 320 nm), and UV-C (100 to 290 nm) [43]. Besides their implication in damaging proteins and membranes, UV-A can damage DNA by generating reactive oxygen species to induce single-strand DNA breaks [44,45], while UV-B can be absorbed directly by DNA to alter or mutate nucleotides [46]. On the other hand, UV-C is the most energetic source that produces more photoproducts than either UV-A or UA-B radiation [47]. RM4440 is a Pseudomonas aeruginosa FRD1 derivative that carries a plasmid-based recA-luxCDABE fusion that serves as a Pseudomonas aeruginosa whole-cell biosensor for monitoring DNA damage [48]. Elasir et al. have immobilized RM4440 in an alginate matrix to simulate the biofilm formation to study the response of biofilm to UV radiation damage [49]. The results reveal that compared to planktonic bacteria, the matrix of EPS seems to be protective in physically shielding microorganisms against UV-C, UV-B, and UV-A radiations, and transmitting only 13%, 31%, and 33% of the UV light, respectively, to the microorganisms. Thus, biofilms are effective at protecting microbial cells from UV radiation and exposure. Biofilm formation can also protect Listeria monocytogenes from UV-C radiation [50]. Listeria monocytogenes N53-1 that was isolated from salmon smoke house and allowed to form a biofilm for seven days exhibited higher UV-C resistance than that incubated for only one hour. Recently, Enyedi et al. revealed that there is a high microbial diversity in the biofilms of naturally radioactive Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

4 of 18

mutate nucleotides [46]. On the other hand, UV-C is the most energetic source that produces more
photoproducts than either UV-A or UA-B radiation [47].

RM4440 is a Pseudomonas aeruginosa FRD1 derivative that carries a plasmid-based recA-luxCDABE
fusion that serves as a Pseudomonas aeruginosa whole-cell biosensor for monitoring DNA damage [48].
Elasir et al. have immobilized RM4440 in an alginate matrix to simulate the bioﬁlm formation to study
the response of bioﬁlm to UV radiation damage [49]. The results reveal that compared to planktonic
bacteria, the matrix of EPS seems to be protective in physically shielding microorganisms against UV-C,
UV-B, and UV-A radiations, and transmitting only 13%, 31%, and 33% of the UV light, respectively,
to the microorganisms. Thus, bioﬁlms are eﬀective at protecting microbial cells from UV radiation
and exposure.

Bioﬁlm formation can also protect Listeria monocytogenes from UV-C radiation [50]. Listeria
monocytogenes N53-1 that was isolated from salmon smoke house and allowed to form a bioﬁlm
for seven days exhibited higher UV-C resistance than that incubated for only one hour. Recently,
Enyedi et al. revealed that there is a high microbial diversity in the bioﬁlms of naturally radioactive
hydrothermal spring caves, which had been especially adapted to an environment of high radioactivity
of the subsurface [51]. Also, they found that the higher radioactivity, the less diversity but more
radiation-resistant microbial communities in bioﬁlms.

Deinococcus geothermalis is a representative of the extremely radiation-resistant family of
Deinococcaceae [52]. Frösler et al. demonstrated that the bioﬁlm of Deinococcus geothermalis DSM
11300 appears to be more UV-tolerant than that of planktonic cells, and speculated that it is possibly
due to the generation of reactive oxygen species from the photodissociation of water molecules retained
in the cells or matrix of EPS in the bioﬁlm [53].

Bioﬁlm formation is one of clever strategies for microorganisms to survive UV exposure.
The study of mechanisms of bioﬁlm formation under UV radiation is also helpful for the control of
harmful microorganisms. A number of studies have shown that with the protection of bioﬁlms by
“radiation-resistant clothing”, a variety of microorganisms are more active under extreme UV radiation
environments. Thus, a better understanding of the microbial-resistant mechanism to UV may help
provide protection for the human aerospace industry.

3.2. Bioﬁlm in Extreme Temperature

Temperature exerts a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on microorganisms, and bioﬁlm can adequately
explain the eﬀects of microorganisms against extreme temperatures. Cihan et al. studied the bioﬁlm
formation of thermophilic bacteria in the Bacillaceae family at diﬀerent temperatures, and revealed
that an incubation temperature at 65
C for the
Thermolongibacillus, Aeribacillus, Geobacillus, and Anoxybacillus thermophilic genera [54].

C is more eﬀective in bioﬁlm production than at 55

◦

◦

◦

Some species in Sulfolobus genus are thermophilic acidophiles that grow optimally at 75

C [55,56].
C, and the results
Koerdt et al. tested the bioﬁlm formation at temperatures ranging from 60 to 85
demonstrate that the amounts of bioﬁlm in both Sulfolobus acidocaldarius (isolated from Yellowstone
National Park, United States (USA)) and Sulfolobus solfataricus (a European isolate from Italy) are
C, they showed a ﬁvefold and fourfold increase in bioﬁlm
increased at 60
formation, respectively [17].

C and 85

C. At 60

◦

◦

◦

◦

Studies of cold-adapted bacterium Bacteriovorax showed that at temperatures below 10
C,
the number of bacteria is signiﬁcantly reduced in the water column, but not in the surface bioﬁlms [57].
◦
C, Bacteriovorax lives 50% longer in bioﬁlms than
Further studies by Williams et al. showed that at 5
in suspension [58]. Also, EPS in bioﬁlm from Antarctic bacteria (cold-tolerant Winogradskyella CAL384
and CAL396, psychrophiles Colwellia GW185, and Shewanella CAL606) showed an ability to form stable
emulsions to protect cells from freeze–thawing cycles, thus increasing the adaptability of microbial
cells to cold environments [59].

◦

Therefore, bioﬁlm formation enables microorganisms in extreme environments to become more
resistant to damage caused by temperature stress. Throughout environmental changes, bioﬁlm can

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

5 of 18

act as a “protective clothing” to provide a suitable habitat for their survival and metabolism. In the
extreme temperature environment, the bioﬁlm serves more as a “smart garment” when dealing with
such high temperatures: it can resist the external high temperature and render the interior suitable for
growth and reproduction. On the other hand, bioﬁlm can also stabilize the internal environment when
it is extremely cold outside, causing no freeze of the cells and enabling them to survive.

3.3. Bioﬁlm in Extreme pH Environments

Bioﬁlms also help microorganisms resist the eﬀects of extreme pH, in which both acidophiles and

alkaliphiles generally exist in bioﬁlms [60–62].

Species abundance usually decreases under extremely acidic conditions, but a large number of
acidophiles that are protected in bioﬁlm are still prevalent [63]. In fact, under extremely acidic pH,
it has been found that the solubility of heavy metals increase, and therefore increasing the toxicity
index. The combination of extremely acidic pH and heavy metals together was found to lead to a
signiﬁcant change in the EPS composition of the bioﬁlm, which plays a vital role in the adaptation
of microorganisms to extreme environments [3]. It can not only prevent heavy metal toxicity, but
also capture and enrich trace elements [64]. Besides, the inositol and 3-O-methylglucose contents in
EPS were found to positively correlate with the toxicity index. Early research showed that inositol
polyphosphates can inhibit the formation of hydroxyl radicals by ferric iron, which can decrease its
toxicity [65], and methylglucose-containing polysaccharides from marine microorganisms have also
been exploited to remove heavy metals from solutions [66]. This data suggests that bioﬁlms play a
protective eﬀect in extremely acidic environments that are mediated, at least in part, by speciﬁc sugars.
Under alkaline conditions, the alkaliphilic communities have also been shown to form bioﬁlms to
enclose the microorganisms in a matrix of EPS [67,68]. Charles et al. showed that under a thick EPS
layer, Alishewanella and Dietzia are capable of growth at pH values between 11.0–11.5, and maintain
internal pH values of 10.4 and 10.7, respectively, demonstrating that bioﬁlm formation can provide a
shelter for alkaliphilic communities to survive hyperalkaline stress to a large extent [69].

To compare the responses of bacteria in bioﬁlm or planktonic state to alkaline stress, clinical isolates
of Enterococcus faecalis, Lactobacillus paracasei, Olsenella uli, Streptococcus anginosus, Streptococcus
gordonii, Streptococcus oralis, and Fusobacterium nucleatum from infected root canals were placed
under a stress at pH 10.5 for 4 h. The results showed that bacteria can survive alkaline shifts better in
the bioﬁlm than in the planktonic state [70]. Additionally, van der Waal et al. reported that increased
EPS production in bioﬁlm protects Enterococcus faecalis against 20 mM of Ca(OH)2 [71].

In general, microorganisms shielded in bioﬁlms can resist extreme pH stress better than in a
planktonic state. However, the exact mechanisms behind the survival of microorganisms in bioﬁlms
exposed to acidic and alkaline challenge is worthy of further studies. As an acid-resistant and
alkali-resistant “strong protective clothing”, it is still unclear whether the bioﬁlm is correlated with
the biological evolution of bacteria. With further exploration, it will be interesting to discover the
characteristic features and structure of this “protective clothing”.

3.4. Bioﬁlm in High-Salinity Environments

There are many halophiles on the Earth, most of which are found in high-salinity environments,
such as salt lakes, marine environments, and inland saline soils. In these places, microbial cytoplasmic
lysis and cell death are signiﬁcantly caused by increasing osmotic pressure [72,73]. Microorganisms
can, in fact, form bioﬁlms that are resistant to high salt damage [74,75]. Indeed, Amjres et al. isolated a
halophilic strain Halomonas stenophila HK30 from a saline wetland in Brikcha (Morocco) that is able
to form bioﬁlm in a medium with 5% w/v salt [76]. Mallic et al. showed that the two halophiles of
Kocuria ﬂava AB402 and Bacillus vietnamensis AB403, which were isolated from mangrove rhizosphere
of Sundarban, can not only form bioﬁlms eﬀectively, but also produce a large amount of EPS under
salt stress; they can also use EPS to develop inherent resistance and adsorb a large amount of metal
elements, etc. [77].

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

6 of 18

Many researchers have conducted a variety of salt tolerance tests of non-halophiles to study
their resistant mechanisms. Kim et al. evaluated the eﬀects of salinity on the bioﬁlm formation of
Vibrio sp. B2 isolated from seawater, brine, and a biofouled membrane coupon, and found that the
salinity-stressed bacteria still maintain good cellular activity and overproduce EPS, which exhibits a
high potential to cause biofouling and bioﬁlm formation [23]. Zhao et al. studied the composition of
EPS from microbial bioﬁlms at diﬀerent salinity, and found that the production of both proteins and
polysaccharides contents of soluble, loosely, or tightly bound EPS in bioﬁlm increase with increasing
salinity [78].

EPS are the main components of the bioﬁlm, which acts as a gel-like matrix that binds cells
together to form aggregates and provide protection for microorganisms against high salt stress [79].
Whether halophiles or non-halophiles, the bioﬁlm produced by them may thus play an important role
in agricultural productions, because they can be used to adsorb various metal elements to help crop
growth and promote soil bioremediation under salt stress.

3.5. Bioﬁlm in High-Pressure Environments

Piezophiles (barophiles) are microorganisms whose survival and reproduction is optimized to
high pressures, such as those in deep-sea environments. Since the piezophiles are diﬃcult to separate
and culture, and live with restrict distribution [80], there have been very few studies on their bioﬁlm
formation. A few available studies only show that an increase in pressure leads to an increase in
the expression of the outer membrane protein [81]. To make up for the deﬁciency of the research on
bioﬁlm formation of piezophiles, the research on the bioﬁlm of non-piezophiles under high pressure
is increasing.

High hydrostatic pressure (HHP) can especially alter many macromolecules in microorganisms
and also aﬀect their translation and transcription within the cells, leading to the production of
dysfunctional proteins [82,83]. Studies on HHP bioﬁlms have shown that microorganisms in the
bioﬁlms are more resistant to high pressure than planktonic microorganisms. Also, bioﬁlms formed by
Gram-negative bacteria are more resistant to HHP than those of Gram-positive bacteria [82].

Bioﬁlm formation can also enhance microbial tolerance to high mechanical pressure. Hou et al.
compared the responses of bioﬁlms to mechanical pressure between an EPS-producing Staphylococcus
aureus ATCC 12600 and a non-EPS-producing Staphylococcus aureus 5298, and found that the bioﬁlm
of former bacterium exhibits a higher resistance to exerted mechanical force because it can yield an
immediate increase in polysaccharide content [24].

Under high-pressure stimulation, the “pressure-resistant garments” of both piezophiles and
non-piezophiles become more “solid”. The studies of formation mechanism and structural composition
of the “pressure-resistant garments” in high-pressure environments will thus play important roles in
the ﬁelds of medicine, industry, and biotechnology.

3.6. Bioﬁlm in Oligotrophic Conditions

Under oligotrophic conditions, microbial growth may be aﬀected due to poor nutrients. However,
during this time, bioﬁlm formation is also found to play a role in the microbial tolerance to the restricted
of microbial growth.

Bacteria can be separated into two general groups regarding the nutrient requirement in the
living environments: copiotrophs and oligotrophs, which grow optimally in high and low nutrient
conditions, respectively.

For copiotrophs, some authors concluded that bioﬁlm production is enhanced in the poor nutrient
medium [84,85]. For example, Cheriﬁ et al. investigated the bioﬁlm formation of copiotroph Listeria
monocytogenes (isolated from pork slaughterhouses and cutting facilities) under a rich medium (brain
heart infusion, BHI) or a 10-fold diluted BHI (BHI/10) [86]. They demonstrated that the bioﬁlm
biovolume in BHI/10 is signiﬁcantly higher than that in BHI. Further investigation revealed that relative
poor nutrients enhance cell death and release eDNA, leading to enhanced bioﬁlm formation and

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

7 of 18

structural stability. Vibrio cholerae is also a special kind of copiotrophs; when placed in an environment
lacking glucose and mannose, Vibrio cholerae A1552 seems to stimulate cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) synthesis, to form a cAMP–cAMP receptor protein (CRP) complex to regulate the expression of
downstream genes related to nutrient acquisition and utilization, leading to the stimulation of bioﬁlm
formation [87,88].

Oligotrophs are the dominant strains in oligotrophic environments and are more common in
pure water. As oligotrophs, the non-tuberculous mycobacteria are the natural inhabitants in pure
water or engineered water systems and soils, and are able to grow at low carbon concentrations [89].
During its growth, bioﬁlms help oligotrophs resist the oligotrophic environments. Although there are
few available studies on oligotrophic bioﬁlms, it is not diﬃcult to speculate that under oligotrophic
conditions, bioﬁlm formation is a good survival strategy for oligotrophs.

Under oligotrophic conditions, such “protective clothing” takes a series of measures to ensure
the normal reproduction and metabolism of microorganisms, and preferentially distributes limited
nutrients within this “protective clothing” [90]. Thus, bioﬁlms seem to play a huge role in the survival
of bacteria in the extreme oligotrophic conditions. Regardless of their types, bioﬁlms act as a “protective
garment” for microorganisms, and are responsible for protecting their survival and reproduction.

3.7. Tolerance and Resistance to Antibiotics in Bioﬁlms

Microorganisms in bioﬁlms seem to show a strong tolerance and resistance to antibiotics. Microbial
tolerance is generally related to the mode of bioﬁlm formation, which is a transient and nonheritable
phenotype [91]. Microbial resistance is an acquired ability of microorganisms to resist antibiotics in an
inheritable mode [92]. Several molecular mechanisms are involved in the bioﬁlm-speciﬁc tolerance
and resistance.

Bioﬁlms can confer microbial tolerance to antibiotics mainly through the following types [26,93].
First, bioﬁlms can serve as physical barriers, and their thickness and chemical composition can
prevent the perfusion of antibiotics [94]. There are many anionic and cationic molecules in the EPS
of bioﬁlms, such as uronic acids, proteins, glycoproteins, glycolipids, eDNA, etc. They can also bind
to charged antibiotics and form a shelter for microorganisms [40,95], in order to help microbial cells
embedded within the bioﬁlms establish tolerance against antibiotics [96]. Singh et al. demonstrated
that the penetration of oxacillin, cefotaxime, and vancomycin are signiﬁcantly reduced through the
bioﬁlms of Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis [97]. The adsorption of antibiotics by
bioﬁlm components [98] or the degradation of antibiotics by hydrolase, such as a β-lactamase [99,100],
can also limit antibiotic penetration. Pel exopolysaccharide, which is cross-linked with negatively
charged eDNA in the Pseudomonas aeruginosa matrix of EPS [101], can also play both structural and
protective roles to reduce its susceptibility to aminoglycoside antibiotics [102].

Second, physiological limitations including the growth rate [103–105], bioﬁlm age [106],
starvation [107], etc., can reduce bioﬁlm susceptibility to the antibiotics. Williamson et al. demonstrated
that the subpopulation of inactive bacteria harbored in Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlms is resistant
to killing by tobramycin and ciproﬂoxacin, but the actively growing population remains sensitive to
antibiotic killing [108]. Besides, a small subpopulation of bacteria in bioﬁlm and persister cells entering
a slow-growing or starving state is also highly tolerant to killing by antibiotics [109].

Microorganisms growing in bioﬁlms are more resistant to antibiotics than in planktonic
counterparts. Several authors have also revealed an interconnection between bioﬁlm formation
and the resistance to antibiotics [110,111].

First, microbial genetic diversiﬁcation in bioﬁlms can contribute to resistances to antibiotics [112].
Second, the bioﬁlm is considered to be a main reservoir of genetic diversity that promotes microbial
survival in extreme environments, leading to the development of resistances to antibiotics. It is reported
that bioﬁlm formation causes an increasing average plasmid copy number as well as the increasing
transcription of plasmid-borne resistant genes in Enterococcus faecalis cells [113]. This ﬁnding suggested
that bioﬁlm growth can reduce microbial susceptibility to antibiotics.

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

8 of 18

Second, multidrug eﬄux pumps in bioﬁlms can transport antibiotics to prevent toxic
accumulation [114–116]. The PA1874-1877 eﬄux pump in Pseudomonas aeruginosa is more expressed in
the bioﬁlm state than in the planktonic state, and is involved in resistance to antibiotics [117]. Deletion
of the PA1874 to PA1877 genes encoding this pump in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 increases the
microbial sensitivity to tobramycin, gentamicin, and ciproﬂoxacin, especially when this mutant strain
is present in a bioﬁlm.

Third, sub-minimal inhibitory concentrations (sub-MICs) of antibiotics can also induce resistances
In clinical isolates of Staphylococcus epidermidis, sub-MICs of erythromycin [118],
to antibiotics.
tetracycline, and quinupristin–dalfopristin [119] seem to enhance the expression of intercellular
adhesion gene clusters, leading to increased EPS expression and invasiveness. Sub-MICs of β-lactam
antibiotics also stimulate a thicker bioﬁlm via the upregulated genes that are involved in glycogen
biosynthesis in the non-typeable Haemophilus inﬂuenzae strains that were isolated from patients with
chronic otitis and chronic bronchitis [120].

Furthermore, polymicrobial bioﬁlms show enhanced resistances to antibiotics [121–123].
For example, Candida albicans, β-1,3-glucan, can bind with oﬂoxacin, and Escherichia coli cells
embedded within the Candida albicans bioﬁlm show increased resistance to oﬂoxacin compared to the
monomicrobial Escherichia coli bioﬁlm [124]. Also, polymicrobial bioﬁlms formed by Staphylococcus
albicans and Candida albicans are often found in diﬀerent types of infections, with Staphylococcus albicans
coated in the matrix secreted by Candida albicans showing enhanced resistance to vancomycin [125–127].
Relatively speaking, the studies of “protective clothing” of microorganisms are more thorough and
comprehensive in the ﬁelds of tolerance and resistance to antibiotics than other resistant mechanisms,
but people are paying more attention to learning how to destroy or take oﬀ this “protective clothing”
to reduce the damage that it causes to humans.

Together, the bioﬁlm can provide a shelter for microorganisms to survive against many kinds of
extreme environments. In addition to those discussed above, bioﬁlms can also protect microorganisms
from several types of acute environmental stressors such as desiccation, heavy metal pollution,
oxidative stress, etc. [3,128] (Figure 2). For example, space habitats living in the International Space
Station (ISS) are under extreme UV radiation, desiccation, temperature, and pressure stresses, but it
was demonstrated that these stresses can trigger abundant EPS production and bioﬁlm formation.
The Mir space station was found to be heavily colonized by bioﬁlms, which damaged quartz windows
and corroded various metal surfaces [129]. As studies on environmental bioﬁlms in extreme habitats
are rare, further investigation into the mechanisms regulating the bioﬁlm formation of microorganisms,
especially those of the environmental isolates (and environmental isolates in situ) in response to
diﬀerent stresses is important. Understanding the structure and protection mechanism of this versatile
and magical “protective clothing” in extreme environments is not only a scientiﬁc study, but also
beneﬁts human life, since it will be a good way for production services.

4. Regulation of Bioﬁlms in Extreme Environments

The emergence of bioﬁlms in extreme environments is the result of a series of changes in gene
expression. It is a struggle for microbial survival to resist extreme environments by regulating the
expression of some genes. In extreme environments, the formation, composition, and function of
bioﬁlms seem to be inseparable from a series of regulatory systems.

4.1. Quorum Sensing-Based Signaling

Quorum sensing (QS) is a group behavior in which microorganisms regulate their gene expression
proﬁle according to the changes of cell density in a population.
It is an induction phenomenon
that occurs when the number of microorganisms reaches a certain density threshold. The QS
system of microorganisms is mainly involved in the diﬀerentiation of microbial bioﬁlms (Table 1),
and is considered to be an indispensable part of microbial transmission mechanisms in extreme

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

9 of 18

environments [2]. In response to various extreme conditions, QS seems to play important roles in the
regulation of bioﬁlm formation [130,131].

In extreme environmental responses, QS can regulate more than 10% of genes in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa that are primarily implicated in the production of virulence factors, bioﬁlm formation,
resistances to antibiotics, mortality, and the amendment of metabolic pathways [132]. In fact, QS is
involved in the tolerance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlms to kanamycin, tobramycin, and hydrogen
peroxide [133,134]. This data may be related to the role of QS in the eDNA production regulation,
which inhibits the penetration of some antibiotics into bioﬁlm [135]. Vibrio cholerae can pass through
the acidic stomach alive before reaching the upper intestine, by developing a thick, glutinous bioﬁlm
mediated by the QS [136]. The Vibrio cholerae mutant that is deﬁcient in the QS regulator, HapR,
which inhibits the expression of the Vibrio polysaccharide biosynthesis operon, seems to exhibit a
thicker bioﬁlm [136]. However, when the Vibrio cholerae comes out of the acidic environment of the
stomach, bioﬁlm protection is not further required, and HapR instead facilitates the disruption of the
bioﬁlm [137].

Table 1. Main aﬀecting factors in bioﬁlm formation.

Factor

Brief Description

Strain

Reference

Environmental
parameter

Ultraviolet (UV)

Temperature

Extreme pH

Salinity

High pressure

Poor nutrient

Quorum
sensing (QS)

Autoinducer-1 (AI-1)

Autoinducer-2 (AI-2)

Messenger
molecule

cyclic dimeric guanosine
3’,5’-monophosphate (c-di-GMP)

Matrix of extracellular polymeric
substances (EPS) shows a
protective property by physical
shielding against UV radiation

Bioﬁlm formation increases at
high temperature, and the
composition of bioﬁlms change at
low temperature. They both
enhance microbial resistance

At extreme pH, bioﬁlms increase
bacterial resistance by altering
EPS content

Bacteria can withstand high salt
damage by aggregating into
granular bioﬁlm forms

High pressure yield an immediate
increase in the polysaccharide
band area of bacterial bioﬁlms

Under poor nutrient conditions,
the bioﬁlm formation is enhanced

AI-1 system is related to bioﬁlm
formation, and can adjust its
amount in extreme environments

AI-2 regulates bioﬁlm formation
against environmental stresses

c-di-GMP can control bioﬁlm
formation in response to diﬀerent
environments

Listeria monocytogenes,
Deinococcus geothermalis

[51,53]

Thermolongibacillus,
Sulfolobus, etc.

Enterococcus faecalis,
Alishewanella, etc.

Halomonas stenophila,
Kocuria ﬂava AB402, etc.

[17,54]

[69,70]

[76,77]

Staphylococcus aureus

[24]

Listeria monocytogenes,
non-tuberculous
mycobacteria

[86,89]

Acinetobacter baumannii,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa

[138]

Biﬁdobacterium longum

[139]

Acidithiobacillus
thioooxidans

[140]

cyclic adenosine
3’,5’-monophosphate (cAMP)

cAMP is crucial for the formation
of pellicle bioﬁlm

Pseudomonas
aeruginosa,Vibrio cholerae

[88,141]

In extremophiles,

there are three primary QS systems:

autoinducer-1 (AI-1), AI-2,
and peptide-based. The AI-1 system is found to be more prevalent (except in the thermophiles
that favor AI-2), while the peptide-based system was the least abundant in extremophiles. The AI-1
system uses N-acyl-homoserine lactones (AHLs) as signals [142], and is associated with the bioﬁlm
formation in Acinetobacter baumannii and Pseudomonas aeruginosa [138]. AI-2, a furanosyl borate diester,
is shared by both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. For example, AI-2 regulates the bioﬁlm
formation in Biﬁdobacterium longum [139]; meanwhile, AI-2 not only regulates bioﬁlm formation,
but also enhances anti-oxidative stress in Deinococcus radiodurans [143]. In acidophiles, approximately
4.5% genes of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T account for the genes involved in the QS

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

10 of 18

network, of which 42.5% are used for bioﬁlm formation regulation. Thus, one may presume that QS
regulates bioﬁlm formation in this bacteria via a complex signal system [144].

4.2. Nucleotide Second Messenger-Based Signaling

(cid:48)

(cid:48)
,5

(cid:48)
Nucleotides such as cyclic dimeric guanosine 3
-monophosphate (c-di-GMP), cyclic adenosine
,5
3
-monophosphate (cAMP), etc., are critical elements of the signal transduction networks,
which link perceptions of the environment to the speciﬁc cellular behaviors of prokaryotes (Table 1).
These molecular mechanisms are particularly crucial in microorganisms that are exposed to certain
types of extreme environments [145].

(cid:48)

c-di-GMP is a novel and ubiquitous bacterial second messenger that was shown to control bioﬁlm
formation in response to environmental inﬂuence [146–148]. It has been reported that EPS components
such as polysaccharides, ﬂagella, pili, adhesins, and eDNA contribute to bioﬁlm formation and are
regulated by c-di-GMP through speciﬁc receptors [149–151]. Generally, an increased concentration
of intracellular c-di-GMP promotes surface attachment and bioﬁlm formation, while decreased
intracellular c-di-GMP concentration induces bioﬁlm dispersal [152] (Table 1). In some acidophiles,
c-di-GMP signaling is related to bioﬁlm formation [145]. For example, Acidithiobacillus can thrive in
extreme environments with poor nutrients, high concentrations of heavy metals, and extreme acidity.
Indeed, several PilZ-containing receptors of Acidithiobacillus are found to be related with Type IV
pilus formation and twitching motility, which are implicated in the irreversible attachment to surfaces,
microcolony grouping, and the structural development of bioﬁlms [153,154]. The pel-like operon,
encoding the c-di-GMP receptor protein PelD, is also found in the Acidithiobacillus strains. A recent
report demonstrated that PelD and the c-di-GMP signal pathway are involved in the bioﬁlm formation
and structure in Acidithiobacillus thioooxidans [140].

Another bacterial second messenger, cAMP, is also found in a variety of prokaryotes and seems
to be conserved among diverse bacteria. Huynh et al. demonstrated that cAMP is involved in the
dispersal of bioﬁlms in Pseudomonas aeruginosa [141] (Table 1). Also, cAMP concentration can control
the bioﬁlm production of Vibrio cholerae [88] (Table 1). In addition, Paytubi et al. demonstrated that
cAMP is involved in the spatial distribution to modulate bioﬁlm locations [155]. In a rich medium
C and static incubation, Salmonella can form a bioﬁlm at the air–liquid
with low osmolarity at 25–28
interface, which is known as the pellicle, while in the minimal media, a solid–liquid interface bioﬁlm
called bottom bioﬁlm is observed [155].

◦

As nucleotide second messengers, c-di-GMP and cAMP respond to various environmental signals
and regulate bioﬁlm formation through various mechanisms [156]. The research on signal regulation
system can help reveal the mechanism of bioﬁlm formation and provide a direct target for bioﬁlm
prevention and control.

5. Conclusions

In extreme environments, microorganisms regulate the expression of a series of bioﬁlm-forming
genes through QS, nucleotide second messenger-based signaling, etc., to endow microorganisms with
the capability of becoming resistant to various extreme environments such as UV radiation, extreme
temperature and pH, high salinity, high pressure, poor nutrients, antibiotics, etc.

Protection by microbial bioﬁlms seems also to play an essential role in the production of
special enzyme preparations for the pharmaceutical industry, food industry, agricultural production,
environmental protection, energy utilization, and other ﬁelds of industry, as well as scientiﬁc research.
Bioﬁlms have several protective advantages that may be physical, physiological, or genetic. An in-depth
study of the protective mechanism of bioﬁlms to microorganisms in extreme environments is expected
to resolve contradictions between the extreme environments of industrial production and the limited
stability of enzyme proteins, allowing one to establish a high eﬃciency and low-cost bioprocessing
technology. Further, microorganisms in bioﬁlms display diﬀerent features to those in planktonic states,

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

11 of 18

and this peculiar form of development endows associated microorganisms with a high tolerance to
extreme environments.

The current review provides comprehensive information on the bioﬁlm formation, bioﬁlms in
extreme environments, and bioﬁlm regulation, which may provoke new strategies for the utilization
and treatment of bioﬁlms in extreme environments.

Author Contributions: W.Y. wrote the manuscript and searched for references; Y.W. and L.L. coordinated to write
the manuscript and participate in drafting the ﬁgures; J.H. developed the concept and added valuable insights
into the manuscript. All the authors have read and approved the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research was funded by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (grant
2018YFD0500204), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant 31770087), the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities (grants 2662017PY112 and 2662015PY175), and the China Postdoctoral Science
Foundation (2018M630872).

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.

2.

3.

4.

Rothschild, L.J.; Mancinelli, R.L. Life in extreme environments. Nature 2001, 409, 1092–1101. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Kaur, A.; Capalash, N.; Sharma, P. Communication mechanisms in extremophiles: Exploring their existence
and industrial applications. Microbiol. Res. 2019, 221, 15–27. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Blanco, Y.; Rivas, L.A.; Gonzalez-Toril, E.; Ruiz-Bermejo, M.; Moreno-Paz, M.; Parro, V.; Palacin, A.;
Aguilera, A.; Puente-Sanchez, F. Environmental parameters, and not phylogeny, determine the composition
of extracellular polymeric substances in microbial mats from extreme environments. Sci. Total Environ. 2019,
650, 384–393. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Gabani, P.; Singh, O.V. Radiation-resistant extremophiles and their potential in biotechnology and therapeutics.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2013, 97, 993–1004. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

5. Wakai, S. Biochemical and thermodynamic analyses of energy conversion in extremophiles. Biosci. Biotechnol.

6.

7.

8.

Biochem. 2019, 83, 49–64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Frols, S. Archaeal bioﬁlms: Widespread and complex. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 2013, 41, 393–398. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Flemming, H.C.; Wingender, J.; Szewzyk, U.; Steinberg, P.; Rice, S.A.; Kjelleberg, S. Bioﬁlms: An emergent
form of bacterial life. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2016, 14, 563–575. [CrossRef]
Huang, H.; Peng, C.; Peng, P.; Lin, Y.; Zhang, X.; Ren, H. Towards the bioﬁlm characterization and regulation
in biological wastewater treatment. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2018, 103, 1115–1129. [CrossRef]

9. Hoiby, N. A personal history of research on microbial bioﬁlms and bioﬁlm infections. Pathog. Dis. 2014, 70,

205–211. [CrossRef]

10. Gupta, P.; Sarkar, S.; Das, B.; Bhattacharjee, S.; Tribedi, P. Bioﬁlm, pathogenesis and prevention—A journey

11.

to break the wall: A review. Arch. Microbiol. 2016, 198, 1–15. [CrossRef]
Stoodley, P.; Sauer, K.; Davies, D.G.; Costerton, J.W. Bioﬁlms as complex diﬀerentiated communities.
Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2002, 56, 187–209. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

12. Watnick, P.; Kolter, R. Bioﬁlm, city of microbes. J. Bacteriol. 2000, 182, 2675–2679. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Rasmussen, B. Filamentous microfossils in a 3235-million-year-old volcanogenic massive sulphide deposit.

Nature 2000, 405, 676–679. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

14. Westall, F.; de Wit, M.J.; Dann, J.; van der Gaast, S.; de Ronde, C.E.J.; Gerneke, D. Early Archean fossil bacteria
and bioﬁlms in hydrothermally-inﬂuenced sediments from the Barberton greenstone belt, South Africa.
Precambrian Res. 2001, 106, 93–116. [CrossRef]

15. Taylor, C.D.; Wirsen, C.O.; Gaill, F. Rapid microbial production of ﬁlamentous sulfur mats at hydrothermal

vents. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1999, 65, 2253–2255. [PubMed]

16. Reysenbach, A.L.; Cady, S.L. Microbiology of ancient and modern hydrothermal systems. Trends Microbiol.

2001, 9, 79–86. [CrossRef]

17. Koerdt, A.; Godeke, J.; Berger, J.; Thormann, K.M.; Albers, S.V. Crenarchaeal bioﬁlm formation under extreme

conditions. PLoS ONE 2010, 5, e14104. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

12 of 18

18. Rinaudi, L.V.; Giordano, W. An integrated view of bioﬁlm formation in rhizobia. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2010,

304, 1–11. [CrossRef]

19. De Carvalho, C.C.C.R. Bioﬁlms: Microbial strategies for surviving UV exposure. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 2017,

996, 233–239.

20. Harrison, J.J.; Ceri, H.; Turner, R.J. Multimetal resistance and tolerance in microbial bioﬁlms. Nat. Rev.

Microbiol. 2007, 5, 928–938. [CrossRef]

21. Norwood, D.E.; Gilmour, A. The diﬀerential adherence capabilities of two Listeria monocytogenes strains in
monoculture and multispecies bioﬁlms as a function of temperature. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 2001, 33, 320–324.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

22. Hostacká, A.; Ciznár, I.; Stefkovicová, M. Temperature and pH aﬀect the production of bacterial bioﬁlm.

Folia Microbiol. 2010, 55, 75–78. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

23. Kim, L.H.; Chong, T.H. Physiological responses of salinity-stressed Vibrio sp. and the eﬀect on the bioﬁlm

formation on a nanoﬁltration membrane. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2017, 51, 1249–1258. [CrossRef]

24. Hou, J.; Veeregowda, D.H.; van de Belt-Gritter, B.; Busscher, H.J.; van der Mei, H.C. Extracellular polymeric
matrix production and relaxation under ﬂuid shear and mechanical pressure in Staphylococcus aureus bioﬁlms.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2018, 84, e01516-17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

25. Marsden, A.E.; Grudzinski, K.; Ondrey, J.M.; DeLoney-Marino, C.R.; Visick, K.L. Impact of salt and nutrient

content on bioﬁlm formation by Vibrio ﬁscheri. PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0169521. [CrossRef]

26. Hathroubi, S.; Mekni, M.A.; Domenico, P.; Nguyen, D.; Jacques, M. Bioﬁlms: Microbial shelters against

antibiotics. Microb. Drug Resist. 2017, 23, 147–156. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

27. Chen, Y.; Yan, F.; Chai, Y.; Liu, H.; Kolter, R.; Losick, R.; Guo, J.H. Biocontrol of tomato wilt disease by
Bacillus subtilis isolates from natural environments depends on conserved genes mediating bioﬁlm formation.
Environ. Microbiol. 2013, 15, 848–864. [CrossRef]

28. Lewis, K. Persister cells. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2010, 64, 357–372. [CrossRef]
29. Van Houdt, R.; Michiels, C.W. Bioﬁlm formation and the food industry, a focus on the bacterial outer surface.

J. Appl. Microbiol. 2010, 109, 1117–1131. [CrossRef]

30. Donlan, R.M. Bioﬁlms: Microbial life on surfaces. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2002, 8, 881–890. [CrossRef]
31. Renner, L.D.; Weibel, D.B. Physicochemical regulation of bioﬁlm formation. MRS Bull. 2011, 36, 347–355.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Flemming, H.C.; Wingender, J. The bioﬁlm matrix. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2010, 8, 623–633. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
33. Powell, L.C.; Pritchard, M.F.; Ferguson, E.L.; Powell, K.A.; Patel, S.U.; Rye, P.D.; Sakellakou, S.M.; Buurma, N.J.;
Brilliant, C.D.; Copping, J.M.; et al. Targeted disruption of the extracellular polymeric network of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa bioﬁlms by alginate oligosaccharides. NPJ Bioﬁlms Microbi. 2018, 4, 13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sadekuzzaman, M.; Yang, S.; Mizan, M.F.R.; Ha, S.D. Current and recent advanced strategies for combating
bioﬁlms. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2015, 14, 491–509. [CrossRef]
Sharahi, J.Y.; Azimi, T.; Shariati, A.; Safari, H.; Tehrani, M.K.; Hashemi, A. Advanced strategies for combating
bacterial bioﬁlms. J. Cell Physiol. 2019, 234, 14689–14708. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

34.

35.

36. Rasamiravaka, T.; Labtani, Q.; Duez, P.; EI Jaziri, M. The formation of bioﬁlms by Pseudomonas aeruginosa:
A review of the natural and synthetic compounds interfering with control mechanisms. BioMed Res. Int.
2015, 2015, 759348. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

37. Bos, R.; van der Mei, H.C.; Busscher, H.J. Physico-chemistry of initial microbial adhesive interactions–its

mechanisms and methods for study. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 1999, 23, 179–230. [CrossRef]

38. Laverty, G.; Gorman, S.P.; Gilmore, B.F. Biomolecular mechanisms of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia

coli bioﬁlm formation. Pathogens 2014, 3, 596–632. [CrossRef]

39. Limoli, D.H.; Jones, C.J.; Wozniak, D.J. Bacterial extracellular polysaccharides in bioﬁlm formation and

40.

function. Microbiol. Spectr. 2015, 3, 1–19. [CrossRef]
Flemming, H.C.; Neu, T.R.; Wozniak, D.J. The EPS matrix: The “house of bioﬁlm cells”. J. Bacteriol. 2007, 189,
7945–7947. [CrossRef]

41. Dufour, D.; Leung, V.; Lévesque, C.M. Bacterial bioﬁlm: Structure, function, and antimicrobial resistance.

42.

Endod. Top. 2012, 22, 2–16. [CrossRef]
Srey, S.; Jahid, I.K.; Ha, S.D. Bioﬁlm formation in food industries: A food safety concern. Food Control 2013,
31, 572–585. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

13 of 18

43. Chatterjee, N.; Walker, G.C. Mechanisms of DNA damage, repair, and mutagenesis. Environ. Mol. Mutagen.

2017, 58, 235–263. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

44. Greinert, R.; Volkmer, B.; Henning, S.; Breitbart, E.W.; Greulich, K.O.; Cardoso, M.C.; Rapp, A. UVA-induced
DNA double-strand breaks result from the repair of clustered oxidative DNA damages. Nucleic Acids Res.
2012, 40, 10263–10273. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

45. Weiss, R.S.; Graindorge, D.; Martineau, S.; Machon, C.; Arnoux, P.; Guitton, J.; Francesconi, S.; Frochot, C.;
Sage, E.; Girard, P.M. Singlet oxygen-mediated oxidation during UVA radiation alters the dynamic of
genomic DNA replication. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0140645.
Sorg, O.; Tran, C.; Carraux, P.; Grand, D.; Hugin, A.; Didierjean, L.; Saurat, J.H. Spectral properties of
topical retinoids prevent DNA damage and apoptosis after acute UV-B exposure in hairless mice. Photochem.
Photobiol. 2005, 81, 830–836. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

46.

47. Kiefer, J. Eﬀects of ultraviolet radiation on DNA. In Chromosomal Alterations; Obe, G., Natarajan, A.T., Eds.;

Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2007; pp. 39–53.

48. Elasri, M.O.; Miller, R.V. A Pseudomonas aeruginosa biosensor responds to exposure to ultraviolet radiation.

Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 1998, 50, 455–458. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

49. Elasri, M.O.; Miller, R.V. Study of the response of a bioﬁlm bacterial community to UV radiation. Appl. Environ.

Microb. 1999, 65, 2025–2031.

50. Bernbom, N.; Vogel, B.F.; Gram, L. Listeria monocytogenes survival of UV-C radiation is enhanced by presence
of sodium chloride, organic food material and by bacterial bioﬁlm formation. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2011, 147,
69–73. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

51. Enyedi, N.T.; Anda, D.; Borsodi, A.K.; Szabó, A.; Pál, S.E.; Óvári, M.; Márialigeti, K.; Kovács-Bodor, P.;
Mádl-Sz˝onyi, J.; Makk, J. Radioactive environment adapted bacterial communities constituting the bioﬁlms of
hydrothermal spring caves (Budapest, Hungary). J. Environ. Radioact. 2019, 203, 8–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Makarova, K.S.; Omelchenko, M.V.; Gaidamakova, E.K.; Matrosova, V.Y.; Vasilenko, A.; Zhai, M.; Lapidus, A.;
Copeland, A.; Kim, E.; Land, M.; et al. Deinococcus geothermalis: The pool of extreme radiation resistance
genes shrinks. PLoS ONE 2007, 2, e955. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Frosler, J.; Panitz, C.; Wingender, J.; Flemming, H.C.; Rettberg, P. Survival of Deinococcus geothermalis in
bioﬁlms under desiccation and simulated space and martian conditions. Astrobiology 2017, 17, 431–447.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

53.

54. Cihan, A.C.; Karaca, B.; Ozel, B.P.; Kilic, T. Determination of the bioﬂm production capacities and
characteristics of members belonging to Bacillaceae family. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2017, 33, 118.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Inskeep, W.P.; Macur, R.E.; Harrison, G.; Bostick, B.C.; Fendorf, S. Biomineralization of as (V)-hydrous ferric
oxyhydroxide in microbial mats of an acid-sulfate-chloride geothermal spring, Yellowstone National Park.
Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 2004, 68, 3141–3155. [CrossRef]

55.

56. Macur, R.E.; Langner, H.W.; Kocar, B.D.; Inskeep, W.P. Linking geochemical processes with microbial
community analysis: Successional dynamics in an arsenic-rich, acid-sulphate-chloride geothermal spring.
Geobiology 2004, 2, 163–177. [CrossRef]

57. Kelley, J.I.; Turng, B.F.; Williams, H.N.; Baer, M.L. Eﬀects of temperature, salinity, and substrate on the
colonization of surfaces in situ by aquatic bdellovibrios. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1997, 63, 84–90. [PubMed]
58. Williams, H.N.; Turng, B.F.; Kelley, J.I. Survival response of Bacteriovorax in surface bioﬁlm versus suspension
when stressed by extremes in environmental conditions. Microb. Ecol. 2009, 58, 474–484. [CrossRef]
59. Caruso, C.; Rizzo, C.; Mangano, S.; Poli, A.; Donato, P.D.; Finore, I.; Nicolaus, B.; Marco, G.D.; Michaud, L.;
Giudice, A.L. Production and biotechnological potential of extracellular polymeric substances from
sponge-associated antarctic bacteria. Appl. Environ. Microb. 2018, 84, e01624-17. [CrossRef]

60. Hujslova, M.; Bystriansky, L.; Benada, O.; Gryndler, M. Fungi, a neglected component of acidophilic bioﬁlms:

Do they have a potential for biotechnology? Extremophiles 2019, 23, 267–275. [CrossRef]

61. Li, T.; Sharp, C.E.; Ataeian, M.; Strous, M.; de Beer, D. Role of extracellular carbonic anhydrase in dissolved
inorganic carbon uptake in alkaliphilic phototrophic bioﬁlm. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 2490. [CrossRef]
62. Li, X.; Kappler, U.; Jiang, G.; Bond, P.L. The ecology of acidophilic microorganisms in the corroding concrete

sewer environment. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 683. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

14 of 18

63. Bellenberg, S.; Huynh, D.; Poetsch, A.; Sand, W.; Vera, M. Proteomics reveal enhanced oxidative stress
responses and metabolic adaptation in Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans bioﬁlm cells on pyrite. Front. Microbiol.
2019, 10, 592. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

64. Aguilera, A.; Souza-Egipsy, V.; Martín-Uriz, P.S.; Amils, R. Extracellular matrix assembly in extreme acidic
eukaryotic bioﬁlms and their possible implications in heavy metal adsorption. Aquat. Toxicol. 2008, 88,
257–266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

65. Hawkins, P.T.; Poyner, D.R.; Jackson, T.R.; Letcher, A.J.; Lander, D.A.; Irvine, R.F. Inhibition of iron-catalysed
hydroxyl radical formation by inositol polyphosphates: A possible physiological function for myo-inositol
hexakisphosphate. Biochem. J. 1993, 294, 929–934. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shah, V.; Ray, A.; Garg, N.; Madamwar, D. Characterization of the extracellular polysaccharide produced
by a marine cyanobacterium, Cyanothece sp. ATCC 51142, and its exploitation toward metal removal from
solutions. Curr. Microbiol. 2000, 40, 274–278. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

66.

67. Charles, C.J.; Rout, S.P.; Garratt, E.J.; Patel, K.; Laws, A.P.; Humphreys, P.N. The enrichment of an alkaliphilic
bioﬁlm consortia capable of the anaerobic degradation of isosaccharinic acid from cellulosic materials
incubated within an anthropogenic, hyperalkaline environment. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 2015, 91, ﬁv085.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

68. Rout, S.P.; Payne, L.; Walker, S.; Scott, T.; Heard, P.; Eccles, H.; Bond, G.; Shah, P.; Bills, P.; Jackson, B.R.; et al.
The impact of alkaliphilic bioﬁlm formation on the release and retention of carbon isotopes from nuclear
reactor graphite. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 4455. [CrossRef]

69. Charles, C.J.; Rout, S.P.; Patel, K.A.; Akbar, S.; Laws, A.P.; Jackson, B.R.; Boxall, S.A.; Humphreys, P.N.
Floc formation reduces the pH stress experienced by microorganisms living in alkaline environments.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2017, 83, e02985-16. [CrossRef]

70. Chávez de Paz, L.E.; Bergenholtz, G.; Dahlén, G.; Svensäter, G. Response to alkaline stress by root canal

bacteria in bioﬁlms. Int. Endod. J. 2007, 40, 344–355.

71. Van der Waal, S.V.; van der Sluis, L.W.; Özok, A.R.; Exterkate, R.A.; van Marle, J.; Wesselink, P.R.; de Soet, J.J.
The eﬀects of hyperosmosis or high pH on a dual-species bioﬁlm of Enterococcus faecalis and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa: An in vitro study. Int. Endod. J. 2011, 44, 1110–1117. [CrossRef]

72. Vyrides, I.; Stuckey, D.C. Adaptation of anaerobic biomass to saline conditions: Role of compatible solutes

and extracellular polysaccharides. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 2009, 44, 46–51. [CrossRef]

73. Kimata-Kino, N.; Ikeda, S.; Kurosawa, N.; Toda, T. Saline adaptation of granules in mesophilic UASB reactors.

Int. Biodeter. Biodegr. 2011, 65, 65–72. [CrossRef]

74. Gagliano, M.C.; Ismail, S.B.; Stams, A.J.M.; Plugge, C.M.; Temmink, H.; Van Lier, J.B. Bioﬁlm formation and
granule properties in anaerobic digestion at high salinity. Water Res. 2017, 121, 61–71. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Adamiak, J.; Otlewska, A.; Gutarowska, B. Halophilic microbial communities in deteriorated buildings.

World J. Microb. Biot. 2015, 31, 1489–1499. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

76. Amjres, H.; Bejar, V.; Quesada, E.; Carranza, D.; Abrini, J.; Sinquin, C.; Ratiskol, J.; Colliec-Jouault, S.;
Llamas, I. Characterization of haloglycan, an exopolysaccharide produced by Halomonas stenophila HK30.
Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2015, 72, 117–124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

77. Mallick, I.; Bhattacharyya, C.; Mukherji, S.; Dey, D.; Sarkar, S.C.; Mukhopadhyay, U.K.; Ghosh, A. Eﬀective
rhizoinoculation and bioﬁlm formation by arsenic immobilizing halophilic plant growth promoting bacteria
(PGPB) isolated from mangrove rhizosphere: A step towards arsenic rhizoremediation. Sci. Total Environ.
2018, 610–611, 1239–1250. [CrossRef]

78. Zhao, L.; She, Z.; Jin, C.; Yang, S.; Guo, L.; Zhao, Y.; Gao, M. Characteristics of extracellular polymeric
substances from sludge and bioﬁlm in a simultaneous nitriﬁcation and denitriﬁcation system under high
salinity stress. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 2016, 39, 1375–1389. [CrossRef]

79. You, G.; Hou, J.; Xu, Y.; Wang, C.; Wang, P.; Miao, L.; Ao, Y.; Li, Y.; Lv, B. Eﬀects of CeO2 nanoparticles
on production and physicochemical characteristics of extracellular polymeric substances in bioﬁlms in
sequencing batch bioﬁlm reactor. Bioresour. Technol. 2015, 194, 91–98. [CrossRef]

80. Kato, C.; Qureshi, M.H. Pressure response in deep-sea piezophilic bacteria. J. Molec. Microbiol. Biotechnol.

81.

1999, 1, 87–92.
Simonato, F.; Campanaro, S.; Lauro, F.M.; Vezzi, A.; D’Angelo, M.; Vitulo, N.; Valle, G.; Bartlett, D.H.
Piezophilic adaptation: A genomic point of view. J. Biotechnol. 2006, 126, 11–25. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

15 of 18

82. Masanta, W.O.; Hinz, R.; Zautner, A.E. Infectious causes of cholesteatoma and treatment of infected ossicles
prior to reimplantation by hydrostatic high-pressure inactivation. BioMed Res. Int. 2015, 2015, 761259.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

83. Pavlovic, M.; Hormann, S.; Vogel, R.F.; Ehrmann, M.A. Transcriptional response reveals translation machinery
as target for high pressure in Lactobacillus sanfranciscensis. Arch. Microbiol. 2005, 184, 11–17. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

84. Kadam, S.R.; den Besten, H.M.; van der Veen, S.; Zwietering, M.H.; Moezelaar, R.; Abee, T. Diversity
assessment of Listeria monocytogenes bioﬁlm formation: Impact of growth condition, serotype and strain
origin. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2013, 165, 259–264. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

85. Combrouse, T.; Sadovskaya, I.; Faille, C.; Kol, O.; Guerardel, Y.; Midelet-Bourdin, G. Quantiﬁcation of the
extracellular matrix of the Listeria monocytogenes bioﬁlms of diﬀerent phylogenic lineages with optimization
of culture conditions. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2013, 114, 1120–1131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

87.

86. Cheriﬁ, T.; Jacques, M.; Quessy, S.; Fravalo, P. Impact of nutrient restriction on the structure of Listeria
monocytogenes bioﬁlm grown in a microﬂuidic system. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 864. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Smith, D.R.; Maestre-Reyna, M.; Lee, G.; Gerard, H.; Wang, A.H.; Watnick, P.I. In situ proteolysis of the
Vibrio cholerae matrix protein RbmA promotes bioﬁlm recruitment. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015, 112,
10491–10496. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Fong, J.C.; Yildiz, F.H. Interplay between cyclic AMP-cyclic AMP receptor protein and cyclic di-GMP
signaling in Vibrio cholerae bioﬁlm formation. J. Bacteriol. 2008, 190, 6646–6659. [CrossRef]
Falkinham, J.O., 3rd. Surrounded by mycobacteria: Nontuberculous mycobacteria in the human environment.
J. Appl. Microbiol. 2009, 107, 356–367. [CrossRef]

88.

89.

90. Mittelman, M.W.; Jones, A.D.G. A pure life: The microbial ecology of high purity industrial waters.

Microb. Ecol. 2018, 76, 9–18. [CrossRef]

91. Olsen, I. Bioﬁlm-speciﬁc antibiotic tolerance and resistance. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. 2015, 34, 877–886.

[CrossRef]

92. Blair, J.M.; Webber, M.A.; Baylay, A.J.; Ogbolu, D.O.; Piddock, L.J. Molecular mechanisms of antibiotic

resistance. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2015, 13, 42–51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

93. Anderl, J.N.; Franklin, M.J.; Stewart, P.S. Role of antibiotic penetration limitation in Klebsiella pneumoniae
bioﬁlm resistance to ampicillin and ciproﬂoxacin. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2000, 44, 1818–1824.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

94. Dunne, W.M., Jr.; Mason, E.O., Jr.; Kplan, S.L. Diﬀusion of rifampin and vancomycin through a Staphylococcus

epidermidis bioﬁlm. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1993, 37, 2522–2526. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

95. Nadell, C.D.; Drescher, K.; Wingreen, N.S.; Bassler, B.L. Extracellular matrix structure governs invasion

resistance in bacterial bioﬁlms. ISME J. 2015, 9, 1700–1709. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

97.

96. De la Fuente-Núñez, C.; Reﬀuveille, F.; Fernández, L.; Hancock, R.E. Bacterial bioﬁlm development as a
multicellular adaptation: Antibiotic resistance and new therapeutic strategies. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2013,
16, 580–589. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Singh, R.; Ray, P.; Das, A.; Sharma, M. Penetration of antibiotics through Staphylococcus aureus and
Staphylococcus epidermidis bioﬁlms. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 2010, 65, 1955–1958. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98. Kumon, H.; Tomochika, K.; Matunaga, T.; Ogawa, M.; Ohmoril, H. A sandwich cup method for the
penetration assay of antimicrobial agents through Pseudomonas exopolysaccharides. Microbiol. Immunol.
1994, 38, 615–619. [CrossRef]

99. Giwercman, B.; Jensen, E.T.; Høiby, N.; Kharazmi, A.; Costerton, J.W. Induction of β-lactamase production in

Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1991, 35, 1008–1010. [CrossRef]

100. Stewart, P.S. Theoretical aspects of antibiotic diﬀusion into microbial bioﬁlms. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.

1996, 40, 2517–2522. [CrossRef]

101. Jennings, L.K.; Storek, K.M.; Ledvina, H.E.; Coulon, C.; Marmont, L.S.; Sadovskaya, I.; Secor, P.R.; Tseng, B.S.;
Scian, M.; Filloux, A.; et al. Pel is a cationic exopolysaccharide that cross-links extracellular DNA in the
Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm matrix. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2015, 112, 11353–11358. [CrossRef]
102. Colvin, K.M.; Gordon, V.D.; Murakami, K.; Borlee, B.R.; Wozniak, D.J.; Wong, G.C.; Parsek, M.R. The Pel
polysaccharide can serve a structural and protective role in the bioﬁlm matrix of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
PLoS Pathog. 2011, 7, e1001264. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

16 of 18

103. Dogtrid, I.G.; Evans, E.; Brown, M.R.W.; Gilbert, P. Growth-rate-independent killing by ciproﬂoxacin of
bioﬁlm-derived Staphylococcus epidermidis evidence for cell-cycle dependency. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 1992,
30, 791–802.

104. Evans, D.J.; Allison, D.G.; Brown, M.R.W.; Gilbert, P. Susceptibility of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia
coli bioﬁlms towards ciproﬂoxacin: Eﬀect of speciﬁc growth rate. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 1991, 27, 177–184.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

105. Gilbert, P.; Collier, P.J.; Brown, M.R.W. Inﬂuence of growth rate on susceptibility to antimicrobial agents:
Bioﬁlms, cell cycle, dormancy, and stringent response. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1990, 34, 1865–1868.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

106. Anwar, H.; Strap, J.L.; Costerton, J.W. Establishment of aging bioﬁlms: Possible mechanism of bacterial
resistance to antimicrobial therapy. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1992, 36, 1347–1351. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Mcleod, G.I.; Spector, M.P. Starvation- and stationary-phase-induced resistance to the antimicrobial peptide
polymyxin B in Salmonella typhimurium is RpoS (σS) independent and occurs through both phoP-dependent
and -independent pathway. J. Bacteriol. 1996, 178, 3683–3688. [CrossRef]

108. Williamson, K.S.; Richards, L.A.; Perez-Osorio, A.C.; Pitts, B.; McInnerney, K.; Stewart, P.S.; Franklin, M.J.
Heterogeneity in Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlms includes expression of ribosome hibernation factors in the
antibiotic-tolerant subpopulation and hypoxia-induced stress response in the metabolically active population.
J. Bacteriol. 2012, 194, 2062–2073. [CrossRef]

109. Lewis, K. Persister cells: Molecular mechanisms related to antibiotic tolerance. Handb. Exp. Pharmacol. 2012,

211, 121–133.

110. Mah, T.F.; Pitts, B.; Pellock, B.; Walker, G.C.; Stewart, P.S.; O’Toole, G.A. A genetic basis for Pseudomonas

aeruginosa bioﬁlm antibiotic resistance. Nature 2003, 426, 306–310. [CrossRef]

111. Bae, J.; Oh, E.; Jeon, B. Enhanced transmission of antibiotic resistance in Campylobacter jejuni bioﬁlms by

natural transformation. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2014, 58, 7573–7575. [CrossRef]

112. Limoli, D.H.; Rockel, A.B.; Host, K.M.; Jha, A.; Kopp, B.T.; Hollis, T.; Wozniak, D.J. Cationic antimicrobial
peptides promote microbial mutagenesis and pathoadaptation in chronic infections. PLoS Pathog. 2014, 10,
e1004083. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

113. Cook, L.C.; Dunny, G.M. Eﬀects of bioﬁlm growth on plasmid copy number and expression of antibiotic
resistance genes in Enterococcus faecalis. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2013, 57, 1850–1856. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

114. Poole, K. Multidrug resistance in Gram-negative bacteria. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2001, 4, 500–508. [CrossRef]
115. Sun, J.; Deng, Z.; Yan, A. Bacterial multidrug eﬄux pumps: Mechanisms, physiology and pharmacological

exploitations. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2014, 453, 254–267. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

116. Fraud, S.; Poole, K. Oxidative stress induction of the MexXY multidrug eﬄux genes and promotion of
aminoglycoside resistance development in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2011, 55,
1068–1074. [CrossRef]

117. Zhang, L.; Mah, T.F. Involvement of a novel eﬄux system in bioﬁlm-speciﬁc resistance to antibiotics.

J. Bacteriol. 2008, 190, 4447–4452. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

118. Wang, Q.; Sun, F.J.; Liu, Y.; Xiong, L.R.; Xie, L.L.; Xia, P.Y. Enhancement of bioﬁlm formation by subinhibitory
concentrations of macrolides in icaADBC-positive and -negative clinical isolates of Staphylococcus epidermidis.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2010, 54, 2707–2711. [CrossRef]

119. Rachid, S.; Ohlsen, K.; Witte, W.; Hacker, J.R.; Ziebuhr, W. Eﬀect of subinhibitory antibiotic concentrations on
polysaccharide intercellular adhesin expression in bioﬁlm-forming Staphylococcus epidermidis. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 2000, 44, 3357–3363. [CrossRef]

120. Wu, S.; Li, X.; Gunawardana, M.; Maguire, K.; Guerrero-Given, D.; Schaudinn, C.; Wang, C.; Baum, M.M.;
Webster, P. Beta-lactam antibiotics stimulate bioﬁlm formation in non-typeable Haemophilus inﬂuenzae by
up-regulating carbohydrate metabolism. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e99204. [CrossRef]

121. Burmolle, M.; Ren, D.; Bjarnsholt, T.; Sorensen, S.J. Interactions in multispecies bioﬁlms: Do they actually

matter? Trends Microbiol. 2014, 22, 84–91. [CrossRef]

122. Roder, H.L.; Sorensen, S.J.; Burmolle, M. Studying bacterial multispecies bioﬁlms: Where to start?

Trends Microbiol. 2016, 24, 503–513. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

17 of 18

123. Burmolle, M.; Webb, J.S.; Rao, D.; Hansen, L.H.; Sorensen, S.J.; Kjelleberg, S. Enhanced bioﬁlm formation and
increased resistance to antimicrobial agents and bacterial invasion are caused by synergistic interactions in
multispecies bioﬁlms. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2006, 72, 3916–3923. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

124. De Brucker, K.; Tan, Y.; Vints, K.; De Cremer, K.; Braem, A.; Verstraeten, N.; Michiels, J.; Vleugels, J.;
Cammue, B.P.; Thevissen, K. Fungal beta-1,3-glucan increases oﬂoxacin tolerance of Escherichia coli in a
polymicrobial E. coli/Candida albicans bioﬁlm. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2015, 59, 3052–3058. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

125. Shirtliﬀ, M.E.; Peters, B.M.; Jabra-Rizk, M.A. Cross-kingdom interactions: Candida albicans and bacteria.

FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2009, 299, 1–8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

126. Harriott, M.M.; Noverr, M.C. Candida albicans and Staphylococcus aureus form polymicrobial bioﬁlms: Eﬀects

on antimicrobial resistance. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2009, 53, 3914–3922. [CrossRef]

127. Peters, B.M.; Jabra-Rizk, M.A.; Scheper, M.A.; Leid, J.G.; Costerton, J.W.; Shirtliﬀ, M.E. Microbial interactions
and diﬀerential protein expression in Staphylococcus aureus-Candida albicans dual-species bioﬁlms. FEMS
Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 2010, 59, 493–503. [CrossRef]

128. Gambino, M.; Cappitelli, F. Mini-review: Bioﬁlm responses to oxidative stress. Biofouling 2016, 32, 167–178.

[CrossRef]

129. Matin, A.; Lynch, S.V. Investigating the threat of bacteria grown in space. ASM News 2005, 71, 235–240.
130. Montgomery, K.; Charlesworth, J.C.; LeBard, R.; Visscher, P.T.; Burns, B.P. Quorum sensing in extreme

environments. Life 2013, 3, 131–148. [CrossRef]

131. Papenfort, K.; Bassler, B.L. Quorum sensing signal-response systems in Gram-negative bacteria. Nat. Rev.

Microbiol. 2016, 14, 576–588. [CrossRef]

132. Moradali, M.F.; Ghods, S.; Rehm, B.H. Pseudomonas aeruginosa Lifestyle: A paradigm for adaptation, survival,

and persistence. Front. Cell Infect. Microbiol. 2017, 7, 39. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

133. Shih, P.C.; Huang, C.T. Eﬀects of quorum-sensing deﬁciency on Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation

and antibiotic resistance. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 2002, 49, 309–314. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

134. Bjarnsholt, T.; Jensen, P.O.; Burmolle, M.; Hentzer, M.; Haagensen, J.A.; Hougen, H.P.; Calum, H.;
Madsen, K.G.; Moser, C.; Molin, S.; et al. Pseudomonas aeruginosa tolerance to tobramycin, hydrogen
peroxide and polymorphonuclear leukocytes is quorum-sensing dependent. Microbiol. -SGM 2005, 151,
373–383. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

135. Ciofu, O.; Tolker-Nielsen, T.; Jensen, P.O.; Wang, H.; Hoiby, N. Antimicrobial resistance, respiratory tract
infections and role of bioﬁlms in lung infections in cystic ﬁbrosis patients. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2015, 85,
7–23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

136. Zhu, J.; Mekalanos, J.J. Quorum sensing-dependent bioﬁlms enhance colonization in Vibrio cholerae. Dev. Cell

2003, 5, 647–656. [CrossRef]

137. March, J.C.; Bentley, W.E. Quorum sensing and bacterial cross-talk in biotechnology. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.

2004, 15, 495–502. [CrossRef]

138. Bhargava, N.; Sharma, P.; Capalash, N. N-acyl homoserine lactone mediated interspecies interactions between

A. baumannii and P. aeruginosa. Biofouling 2012, 28, 813–822. [CrossRef]

139. Sun, Z.; He, X.; Brancaccio, V.F.; Yuan, J.; Riedel, C.U. Biﬁdobacteria exhibit LuxS-dependent autoinducer 2

activity and bioﬁlm formation. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e88260. [CrossRef]

140. Díaz, M.; Castro, M.; Copaja, S.; Guiliani, N. Bioﬁlm formation by the acidophile bacterium Acidithiobacillus

thiooxidans involves c-di-GMP pathway and Pel exopolysaccharide. Genes 2018, 9, 113. [CrossRef]

141. Huynh, T.T.; McDougald, D.; Klebensberger, J.; Al Qarni, B.; Barraud, N.; Rice, S.A.; Kjelleberg, S.; Schleheck, D.
Glucose starvation-induced dispersal of Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlms is cAMP and energy dependent.
PLoS ONE 2012, 7, e42874. [CrossRef]

142. Galloway, W.R.J.D.; Hodgkinson, J.T.; Bowden, S.D.; Welch, M.; Spring, D.R. Quorum sensing in
Gram-negative bacteria: Small-molecule modulation of AHL and AI-2 quorum sensing pathways. Chem. Rev.
2011, 111, 28–67. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

143. Lin, L.; Dai, S.; Tian, B.; Li, T.; Yu, J.; Liu, C.; Wang, L.; Xu, H.; Zhao, Y.; Hua, Y. DqsIR quorum
sensing-mediated gene regulation of the extremophilic bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans in response to
oxidative stress. Mol. Microbiol. 2016, 100, 527–541. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3423

18 of 18

144. Mamani, S.; Moinier, D.; Denis, Y.; Soulere, L.; Queneau, Y.; Talla, E.; Bonnefoy, V.; Guiliani, N. Insights into
the quorum sensing regulon of the acidophilic Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans revealed by transcriptomic in
the presence of an Acyl homoserine lactone superagonist analog. Front. Microbiol. 2016, 7, 1365. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

145. Moya-Beltran, A.; Rojas-Villalobos, C.; Diaz, M.; Guiliani, N.; Quatrini, R.; Castro, M. Nucleotide second
messenger-based signaling in extreme acidophiles of the Acidithiobacillus species complex: Partition between
the core and variable gene complements. Front. Microbiol. 2019, 10, 381. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

146. Coggan, K.A.; Wolfgang, M.C. Global regulatory pathways and cross-talk control Pseudomonas aeruginosa

environmental lifestyle and virulence phenotype. Curr. Issues Mol. Biol. 2012, 14, 47–70. [PubMed]

147. Hengge, R. Principles of c-di-GMP signalling in bacteria. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2009, 7, 263–273. [CrossRef]

[PubMed]

148. Römling, U.; Amikam, D. Cyclic di-GMP as a second messenger. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2006, 9, 218–228.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]

149. Irie, Y.; Borlee, B.R.; O’Connor, J.R.; Hill, P.J.; Harwood, C.S.; Wozniak, D.J.; Parsek, M.R. Self-produced
exopolysaccharide is a signal that stimulates bioﬁlm formation in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 2012, 109, 20632–20636. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

150. Jain, R.; Behrens, A.J.; Kaever, V.; Kazmierczak, B.I. Type IV pilus assembly in Pseudomonas aeruginosa over a
broad range of cyclic di-GMP concentrations. J. Bacteriol. 2012, 194, 4285–4294. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Ueda, A.; Wood, T.K. Tyrosine phosphatase TpbA of Pseudomonas aeruginosa controls extracellular DNA via
cyclic diguanylic acid concentrations. Environ. Microbiol. Rep. 2010, 2, 449–455. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Tischler, A.D.; Camilli, A. Cyclic diguanylate (c-di-GMP) regulates Vibrio cholerae bioﬁlm formation.

Mol. Microbiol. 2004, 53, 857–869. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

153. O’Toole, G.A.; Kolter, R. Flagellar and twitching motility are necessary for Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm

development. Mol. Microbiol. 1998, 30, 295–304. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

154. Semmler, A.B.T.; Whitchurch, C.B.; Mattick, J.S. A re-examination of twitching motility in Pseudomonas

aeruginosa. Microbiol. -SGM 1999, 145, 2863–2873. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

155. Paytubi, S.; Cansado, C.; Madrid, C.; Balsalobre, C. Nutrient composition promotes switching between

pellicle and bottom bioﬁlm in Salmonella. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 2160. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

156. Toyofuku, M.; Inaba, T.; Kiyokawa, T.; Obana, N.; Yawata, Y.; Nomura, N. Environmental factors that shape

bioﬁlm formation. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 2016, 80, 7–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

