Review

7

Future Med. Chem.

4

2015

Nira Rabin1, Yue Zheng1, 
Clement Opoku-Temeng1, 
Yixuan Du1, Eric Bonsu2 
& Herman O Sintim*,1
1Department of Chemistry 
& Biochemistry, University of Maryland, 
College Park, MD 20742, USA 
2Department of Natural Sciences, 
Bowie State University, 14000 Jericho 
Park Road, Bowie, MD 20715, USA 
*Author for correspondence:  
Tel.: +1 301 405 0633  
Fax: +1 301 314 9121  
hsintim@umd.edu

Review

Biofilm formation mechanisms and targets 
for developing antibiofilm agents

Biofilms are communities of microorganisms that are attached to a surface and play a 
significant role in the persistence of bacterial infections. Bacteria within a biofilm are 
several  orders  of  magnitude  more  resistant  to  antibiotics,  compared  with  planktonic 
bacteria. Thus far, no drugs are in clinical use that specifically target bacterial biofilms. This 
is probably because until recently the molecular details of biofilm formation were poorly 
understood.  Bacteria  integrate  information  from  the  environment,  such  as  quorum-
sensing autoinducers and nutrients, into appropriate biofilm-related gene expression, 
and the identity of the key players, such as cyclic dinucleotide second messengers and 
regulatory  RNAs  are  beginning  to  be  uncovered.  Herein,  we  highlight  the  current 
understanding of the processes that lead to biofilm formation in many bacteria.

Dating back to the seminal works of Robert 
Koch, the father of modern microbiology, to 
the 1970s, bacteria were largely considered as 
single free-floating microorganisms. Using the 
planktonic pure bacterial culture model, scien-
tists have been able to study many deadly bac-
teria and developed biocides to kill such bac-
teria. The emergence of drug-resistant bacteria 
and the difficulty in killing some bacteria led 
to a re-evaluation of the bacterial lifestyle and 
it is now acknowledged that the aggregation of 
bacteria within self-produced matrices, called 
biofilms, endows bacteria with mechanisms to 
resist  biocides.  Biofilms  were  observed  a  few 
centuries before their relevance to the persis-
tence of disease was realized. In 1684, a Dutch 
scientist, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, saw den-
tal  plaque  using  his  self-constructed  micro-
scope and he described it as scurf. During the 
early part of the 20th century many scientists 
reported that most bacteria were not free-float-
ing but were attached to surfaces, such as the 
bottom of lakes [1,2]. Scientists began to realize 
that some sessile bacteria were directly related 
to disease when in 1977 Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa  aggregation  was  found  in  sputum  from 
the lungs of infected cystic fibrosis patients [3]. 
In  1978,  Clark  reported  that  an  important 
component  of  Streptococcus  mutans  biofilm, 

polysaccharide  glycocalyx  formed  on  teeth. 
The  term  ‘biofilm’  was  formally  introduced 
in 1978 by Costerton [4]. Biofilms have varied 
morphologies,  depending  on  the  constituent 
bacteria as well as the conditions under which 
that biofilm was formed. See Figure 1 for a few 
examples of bacterial biofilms.

In  the  last  few  years,  interests  in  biofilm 
formation  by  a  group  of  clinically  relevant 
bacteria,  which  cause  high  mortality,  called 
ESKAPE (Enterococcus faecalis, Staphylococcus 
aureus,  Klebsiella  pneumoniae,  Acinetobacter 
baumannii,  P.  aeruginosa  and  Enterobacter 
spp.) have intensified. There is an interest in 
understanding biofilm formation by bacteria 
that  cause  dental  caries,  such  as  Streptococ-
cus  sobrinus  and  S.  mutans,  and  also  there 
are many efforts to delineate biofilm mecha-
nisms of bacteria that foul implants, such as 
Proteus mirabilis. In the sections that follow, 
we  highlight  current  understanding  in  how 
the aforementioned and other bacteria form 
biofilms  and  targets  or  processes,  for  which 
small molecules can be developed against to 
inhibit bacterial biofilm formation.

Biofilm structure
the  extracellular 
The 
polymeric substance (EPS) matrix of bio-

structure  of 

10.4155/FMC.15.6 © N Rabin et al.

Future Med. Chem. (2015) 7(4), 493–512

ISSN 1756-8919

493

FutureMedicinalChemistry part ofFor reprint orders, please contact reprints@future-science.comReview    Rabin, Zheng, Opoku-Temeng, Du, Bonsu & Sintim

Key terms

Extracellular polymeric substances: The biofilm is 
supported by a matrix of polymeric compounds. These 
compounds are secreted by bacteria into the environment. 
EPS are usually composed of exopolysaccharides, proteins 
and nucleic acids.

Exopolysaccharides: Exopolysaccharides are high-
molecular-weight polymers that are composed of sugar 
residues and are secreted by bacteria into the surrounding 
environment.

films is composed of one or more of extracellular poly-
saccharides,  DNA  and  proteins  (Figure  2)  [11].  Chan-
nels in the biofilm allow for water, air and nutrients to 
get to all parts of the structure [12].

Exopolysaccharides
Exopolysaccharides are either synthesized extracel-
lularly or intracellularly and secreted into the outside 

environment [13]. In electron microscopy, they look like 
linear  or  branched  long  strands  that  are  attached  to 
cell surfaces and stretched out to form large networks 
(Figure  3).  Exopolysaccharides  serve  as  scaffolds  for 
other carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids and lipids 
to adhere. The components, structures and properties 
of the exopolysaccharides differ from one another.

Nelson  and  coworkers  analyzed  the  compositions 
and linkages of EPS matrix from E. faecalis, S. aureus, 
K.  pneumoniae,  A.  baumannii,  P.  aeruginosa  and 
E.  spp.  biofilms  [15].  Mannose,  galactose  and  glucose 
are  the  most  abundant  carbohydrates,  followed  by 
N-acetyl-glucosamine,  galacturonic  acid,  arabinose, 
fucose, rhamnose and xylose. Most exopolysaccharides 
are not biofilm specific, but their production increases 
as a result of a stress response, such as colanic acid pro-
duction in Escherichia coli [16] and alginate synthesis in 
P. aeruginosa [17]. Colanic acid (also known as M anti-
gen) is an extracellular heteropolysaccharide found in 

A

D

B

C

1 µm

10 µm

E

10 µm

F

Figure 1. Bacterial biofilms. (A) SEM image of Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates attaching to glass surfaces; 
(B) biofilm formation of Escherichia coli on titanium oxide surface; (C) SEM image of catheter-associated 
Staphylococcus aureus biofilm growth in vivo; (D) electron microscopy of Staphylococcus epidermidis biofilm 
formation on Teflon catheter; (E) SEM image showing attachment and biofilm formation by Salmonella enterica 
serovar Poona cells inside the netting of inoculated cantaloupe; (F) SEM of mature mixed biofilms formed on 
discs of hydroxyapatite, demonstrating the affinity of Streptococcus mutans to the hyphal elements of Candida 
albicans.  SEM: Scanning electron microscopy. 
 (A) Reproduced from [5]. 
 (B) Reproduced from [6]. 
 (C) Reproduced with permission from [7] © The Americanl Association of Immunologists, Inc. (2011). 
 (D) Rreproduced with permission from [8] © Nature Publishing Group (2011). 
 (E) Rreproduced with permission from [9] © John Wiley & Sons (2008). 
 (F) Reproduced from [10].

494

Future Med. Chem. (2015) 7(4)

future science group 
 
 
 
Biofilm formation mechanisms & targets for developing antibiofilm agents    Review

Bacterial cell

Enzyme

Exopolysaccharide

DNA

Protein

Water channel

genes  are  responsible  for  glucose-rich  exopolysaccha-
rides  formation  in  the  strain  PA14[22]  and  psl  genes 
are  involved  in  mannose-rich  exopolysaccharides  for-
mation  in  strains  ZK2870 [23]  and  PAO1[24].  A  psl-
deficient PAO1 strain could still form mature biofilm 
by upregulating pel genes [30]. It was shown that AlgC 
enzyme  is  also  needed  for  the  synthesis  of  Psl  and 
Pel [28]. Man-1-P is a common intermediate in the syn-
thesis of Psl, alginate and LPS, and the productions of 
these biofilm components were found to be influenced 
by each other (Figure 6A)  [28]. That is, if one of them 
was over produced, then the production of the others 
would be reduced.

In total, there are 24 genes involved in the produc-
tion  and  secretion  of  alginate  in  P.  aeruginosa.  Eight 
of them regulate the exportation of alginic acids, and 
12  are  responsible  for  the  biosynthesis  of  the  poly-
saccharide.  The  four  remaining  genes  regulate  the 
synthesis [32,33].

In  Staphylococcus,  the  biofilm-related  exopolysac-
charide  is  polysaccharide  intercellular  adhesin  (PIA), 

×10,000

Enlargement

Figure 3. Scanning electron microscopy visualization 
of biofilm. The bacteria and the extracellular 
polymeric substance matrix were visualized by SEM at 
×10,000 magnification. The white box indicates the 
enlarged section, and the white arrow indicates the 
connections between bacteria in 3-day old biofilm 
(scale bar = 1 μm).  
SEM: Scanning electron microscopy. 
Reproduced from [14].

www.future-science.com

495

Figure 2. Biofilm structure.

Enterobacteriaceae [18]. The colanic acid repeat unit is 
made  up  of  l-fucose,  d-galactose,  d-glucuronate  and 
d-glucose  and  decorated  with  O-acetyl  and  pyruvate 
side chains [19]. The repeat units are assembled by gly-
cosyl transferases on the cytoplasmic side of the inner 
cell membrane. Then the repeat units are flipped from 
the  cytoplasm  into  the  periplasm  by  Wzx.  Wzy  sys-
tem is responsible for initial polymerization and high-
level  polymerization  is  conducted  by  Wzc  and  Wzb. 
The  outer-membrane  protein  Wza  transports  colanic 
acid  polymers  into  the  extracellular  space  [20].  E.  coli 
K-12 strain defective in colanic acid production has a 
slower  initial  attachment  rate,  but  the  attachment  is 
not completely abolished [21].

There are three exopolysaccharides associated with 
P. aeruginosa biofilms: Pel  [22], Psl  [23,24] and alginate 
(Figure 4) [25]. Alginate is composed of d-mannuronic 
acid  residues  interspersed  with  l-guluronic  acid  resi-
dues  (Figure  5B).  Alginate  is  not  involved  in  biofilm 
initiation, but it is a critical virulence factor in chronic 
infections.  Alginate  protects  P.  aeruginosa  cells  from 
antibiotics  such  as  ciprofloxacin,  gentamicin,  ticar-
cillin  and  ceftazidime  [26],  and  it  suppresses  host 
immune response  [27]. AlgC enzyme was found to be 
involved in the synthesis of alginate and lipopolysac-
charide  (LPS)  (Figure  5A)  [28].  The  enzyme,  encoded 
by algC gene, has both phosphomannomutase activity 
and phosphoglucomutase activity. The conversions of 
Man-6-P into Man-1-P and glucose-6-P into glucose-
1-P  are  catalyzed  by  this  enzyme.  Man-1-P  is  a  cru-
cial intermediate in the synthesis pathway of alginate 
and LPS [29]. Apart from alginate and LPS, Psl and Pel 
are also two major biofilm matrix exopolysaccharides. 
Pel  and  Psl  are  both  important  materials  in  mature 
P. aeruginosa biofilms. Psl polysaccharide is composed 
of  a  repeating  pentamer  consisting  of  d-mannose, 
l-rhamnose and  d-glucose residues  (Figure  6B) and it 
promotes  the  initial  surface  attachment  process.  Pel 

future science groupReview    Rabin, Zheng, Opoku-Temeng, Du, Bonsu & Sintim

A
10 µm

0

8

6

4

2

0

2

4

6

8

10 µm

B

C

10 µm

8

6

4

2

0

0

24

6

8

10 µm

Figure 4. Extracellular polysaccharides in Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. (A) Atomic force 
microscopy image of alginate in P. aeruginosa FRD1. (B) Confocal laser scanning microscopy image of Psl in 
hydrated P. aeruginosa PAO1. (C) SEM image of Pel in P. aeruginosa PA14.SEM: Scanning electron microscopy. 
Reproduced from [31].

which was characterized by Mack and coworkers  [34]. 
PIA,  also  known  as  poly  N-acetyl  glucosamine,  is  a 
linear polymer composed of β-1,6-linked glucosamine 
residues. More than 80% of the PIA residues in Staphy-
lococcus  epidermidis  are  N-acetylated  and  the  rest  are 
positively  charged  [34].  Biosynthesis  of  PIA  is  con-
ducted  by  four  proteins:  IcaA,  IcaB,  IcaC  and  IcaD. 
The N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases IcaA and IcaD 
synthesize  20  residue  oligomers  from  UDP-GlcNAc. 
IcaC is involved in long oligomer formation (>130 resi-
dues) and transportation of the oligomers to the extra-
cellular space. Deacetylation by IcaB results in positive 
charges,  which  is  essential  for  interactions  with  cell 
membranes [35].

In  Bacillus  subtilis  the  biofilm-related  exopolysac-
charide can be EPS or poly-δ-glutamate, depending on 
the strain and the conditions [36,37].

Extracellular proteins
Extracellular  proteins  are  another  major  EPS  matrix 
component  [38].  Some  proteins  are  attached  to  cell 
surfaces and polysaccharides to help with biofilm for-
mation and stabilization. One example is the glucan-
binding proteins (Gbps) in S. mutans biofilm [39]. Gbps 
play  an  important  role  in  biofilm  architecture  main-
tenance  by  linking  bacteria  and  exopolysaccharides. 
Biofilms produced by Gbps mutants have significantly 
reduced height.

Amyloids  are  also  insoluble  fibrous  proteins  that 
play  a  supportive  role  in  biofilm  architecture.  One 
example  is  the  Fap  amyloids  in  Pseudomonas  spp. 
Overexpression  of  Fap  amyloids  leads  to  cell  aggre-
gation  and  increased  biofilm  formation  [40].  Amy-
loid  protein  TasA  is  one  of  the  major  components 
of  B.  subtilis  biofilms  [41].  TasA  forms  strong  fibers 
that can hold biofilm cells together and tolerate harsh 

destructive  forces.  Another  example  is  the  biofilm-
associated  protein  (bap)  family.  The  bap  family 
includes Bap protein from S. aureus [42] and Esp pro-
tein from E. faecalis  [43]. The bap family is involved 
in  biofilm  formation  and  infection  processes  [44]. 
Other  examples  include  outer-membrane  lectins  of 
Azospirillum brasiliense [45] and the galactophilic lec-
tin  le-cA  [46]  and l-fucose  binding  lectin  lecB [47]  of 
P. aeruginosa.

Some enzymes are involved in degradation processes 
within biofilms. The enzymes’ substrates include poly-
saccharides,  proteins,  nucleic  acids,  cellulose,  lipids, 
other  EPS  matrix  components  and  objects  that  are 
trapped in the EPS matrix. These enzymes can break 
down  biopolymers  and  provide  carbon  and  energy 
resources  to  biofilm  cells,  especially  during  starva-
tion  [48].  The  detachment  and  dispersal  of  biofilm 
also require enzymatic functions. Degradation of EPS 
matrix internally by enzymes releases biofilm cells and 
initiate  a  new  biofilm  lifecycle.  For  example,  DspB 
protein  is  responsible  for  the  surface  detachment  of 
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae biofilms [49].

eDNA
Extracellular  DNAs  (eDNAs)  were  previously  con-
sidered as leftovers from lyzed cells until Mattick and 
coworkers found that DNase I could prevent P. aerugi-
nosa biofilm formation [50]. The fact that eDNA not only 
comes from lyzed cells but also is actively secreted [51] 
indicates that eDNA has an important role in biofilm 
formation. It is found to be critical for biofilm attach-
ment (Figure 7). Its negative charge works as a repulse 
force in the initial attachment, but when the distance 
between  cell  and  surface  becomes  a  few  nanometers, 
eDNA interacts with receptors on substratum surface 
to  facilitate  adhesion  [52].  Also,  eDNA  was  found  to 

496

Future Med. Chem. (2015) 7(4)

future science groupBiofilm formation mechanisms & targets for developing antibiofilm agents    Review

A

Alginate biosynthesis

AlgE

AlgL

AlgX

AlgF

AlgK

AlgJ

AlgG

Algl

Alg44

Alg8

c-di-GMP

GDP-mannuronic acid

AlgD

GDP-mannose

AlgA

Mannose-1-phosphate

AlgC

AlgA

Mannose-6-phosphate

Fructose-6-phosphate

Outer
membrane

Cytoplasmic
membrane

B

Alginate structure

-
O

O

O
HO

O

HO

O

O

O

O

O
-

O

HO

-
O

O

O

HO

HO

O

O

O

HO

HO

O

O

O
-

Figure 5. Alginate (A) biosynthesis and (B) chemical structure.

coordinate  cell  movement  in  the  twitching  motility-
mediated  P.  aeruginosa  biofilm  expansion  [53].  Due 
to its negative charge, eDNA is able to chelate metal 
cations and some positively charged antibiotics. eDNA 
can  chelate  Mg2+  and  activate  PhoPQ/PmrAB  two-
component  systems,  leading  to  antimicrobial  peptide 
resistance  in  P.  aeruginosa  [54,55],  Salmonella  enterica 
serovar  Typhimurium  [56]  and  other  Gram-negative 
bacteria.  In  S.  epidermidis,  eDNA  was  also  found  to 
inhibit  the  transportation  of  vancomycin  within  bio-

films and hence protect the bacteria embedded within 
the biofilm [57,58].

The current knowledge about the roles that eDNA 
plays in biofilm maturation and persistence is limited 
and more research is warranted to shed light on its role 
in biofilm development.

Reason for biofilm formation
Many bacteria can switch between planktonic form and 
biofilm  form.  The  planktonic  bacteria  have  relatively 

www.future-science.com

497

future science groupReview    Rabin, Zheng, Opoku-Temeng, Du, Bonsu & Sintim

A

PsI biosynthesis

PsID

PsIG

PsIE

PsIA

PsIJ
???

PsIK
???

PsIL
???

Outer
membrane

Cytoplasmc 
membrane

PsIH

PsII

PsIC

PsIF

PsIB

Mannose-1-phosphate

GDP-D- mannose

AlgC

Mannose-6-phosphate

dTDP-L-Rhamnose

UCP-D-glucose

RmIABCD

GalU

PsIB

PGI

AlgC

Fructose-6-phosphate

Glucose-6-phosphate

Glucose-1-phosphate

B

PsI structure

OH

HO

O

HO

HO

OOH

HO

O

O

HO

O

OH

OH

HO

O

OH

O

OH

O

HO
O

O

O

OH

Figure 6. Psl (A) biosynthesis and (B) chemical structure.

high cell growth and reproduction rate. However, the 
biofilm  state  appears  to  be  natural  and  predominant 
state of bacteria. Several reasons could account for the 
need for a bacterial biofilm state [60]. First, biofilm can 
enhance  the  tolerance  of  bacteria  to  harsh  environ-
mental  conditions.  Bacteria  can  avoid  being  washed 
away by water flow or blood stream by simply attach-
ing to a surface or tissue. The oral biofilms can stand 
up to repeated, strong, shear forces. Cells in biofilms 
are about 1000 times more resistant than their plank-
tonic  [61].  Second,  the  EPS  matrix  protects  bacteria 
cells,  in  deeper  layers,  against  antimicrobial  agents 

probably  by  limiting  the  diffusion  of  these  agents. 
Biofilm  restricts  bacterial  mobility  and  increases  cell 
density, which also provides an optimal environment 
for eDNA (plasmid) exchange (via conjugation), some 
of which encode for antibiotic resistance. As reported 
by  Hausner  and  Wuertz,  the  horizontal  gene  trans-
fer rate is significantly higher in biofilms than in the 
planktonic cells [62].

Process of biofilm formation
A  prerequisite  of  biofilm  formation  is  that  bacte-
ria  should  get  close  enough  to  a  surface.  As  bacteria 

498

Future Med. Chem. (2015) 7(4)

future science groupBiofilm formation mechanisms & targets for developing antibiofilm agents    Review

approach  a  surface  several  forces,  both  attractive  and 
repulsive, come into play. At about 10–20 nm distance 
from  the  surface,  the  negative  charges  on  the  bacte-
rial  surface  are  repelled  by  negative  charges  on  most 
environmental surfaces [63]. This repulsion could, how-
ever,  be  overcome  by  attractive  van  der  Waals  forces 
between  the  bacterial  cells  and  the  surface  as  well  as 
the use of fimbriae and flagella to provide mechanical 
attachment to the surface  [63]. Biofilm formation can 
be  described  in  three  stages:  attachment,  maturation 
and dispersion (Figure 8).

The attachment step could be further categorized as 
a  two-stage  process:  initial  reversible  attachment  and 
irreversible  attachment  [64].  The  irreversible  attached 
biofilm can tolerate stronger physical or chemical shear 
forces.  [65] In the initial attachment, flagella and type 
IV pili-mediated motilities are important. Flagella are 
critical  for  initial  interactions  between  cells  and  sur-
face. Type IV pili-mediated twitching motilities enable 
attached  cells  to  aggregate  and  form  microcolonies. 
O’Toole  and  Kolter  demonstrated  that  P.  aeruginosa 
flagella-deficient mutants could not land onto surfaces 
and  type  IV  pili-deficient  mutants  could  not  form 
microcolonies [66].

For  the  human  pathogens  S.  epidermidis  and 
S.  aureus  the  initial  step  of  biofilm  formation  is  the 
attachment  to  human  matrix  proteins,  such  as  fibro-
nectin  (Fn),  fibrinogen  (Fg),  vitronectin  (Vn),  etc. 
Microbial  surface  components  recognizing  adhesive 
matrix  molecules  dependent  adhesions  are  covalently 
linked to the peptidoglycan on the cell wall. S. aureus 
has  more  than  20  microbial  surface  components 
recognizing  adhesive  matrix  molecule  genes  while 
S.  epidermidis  RP62A  has  only  12  [67].  Noncovalent 
adhesions, such as those mediated by autolysins, also 
contribute to initial attachment of biofilms [68].

The production of EPS matrix signifies the irrevers-
ible  phase  of  bacterial  attachment  to  a  surface.  The 
EPS  matrix  of  P.  aeruginosa  has  been  well  studied, 
probably  due  to  the  role  that  P.  aeruginosa  biofilms 
play  in  the  progression  of  cystic  fibrosis.  Alginate,  a 
major polysaccharide component of P. aeruginosa EPS 
matrix, is produced by bacteria that are attached to a 
surface  (recently  attached  bacteria)  in  quantities  that 
are  several  folds  more  than  by  planktonic  cells  [69]. 
The σ factor AlgT, which is also required for alginate 
production, downregulates flagella genes [70].

Once  the  first  layer  of  the  biofilm  is  established, 
cells of the same species or other species are recruited 
to the biofilm from the bulk fluid. Biofilm grows from 
a thin layer to a ‘mushroom’ or ‘tower’ shape structure. 
In a thick biofilm (>100 layers), bacteria are arranged 
according to their metabolism and aero tolerance. For 
example, anaerobic bacteria prefer to live in deeper lay-

Key terms

Planktonic cells: Bacteria that float or swim as single cells.

Dispersion: The release of planktonic cells from the biofilm 
as a result of unfavorable conditions for the biofilm form. 
This is the final step in biofilm development, from a mature 
biofilm to the planktonic form. Usually few parts of the 
biofilm are dispersed and it is a continuous process. This 
step allows the biofilm to spread and colonize on a new 
surface.

ers to avoid exposure to oxygen. Bacteria within biofilm 
communities ‘talk’ to each other and take specialized 
functions. As the biofilm matures, more biofilm scaf-
folds, such as proteins, DNA, polysaccharides, etc. are 
secreted into the biofilm by the entrapped bacteria.

After biofilm maturation the dispersal step, which is 
also critical for the biofilm life cycle, follows. Biofilms 
disperse because of myriads of factors, such as lack of 
nutrients,  intense  competition,  outgrown  population, 
etc. Dispersal could occur in the whole biofilm or just 
a part of it. Release of planktonic bacteria promotes the 
initiation of new biofilms at other sites.

Biofilm-related diseases
Biofilms  are  linked  to  various  human  diseases  [71]. 
Many  bacterial  infections  are  biofilm  related,  for 
example, chronic lung, wound and ear infections [72]. 
Bioflms  are  also  able  to  colonize  on  medical  devices 
such as catheters and implants. According to the NIH 
more  than  80%  of  all  microbial  infections  are  bio-
film related [73]. These kinds of infections are hard to 
diagnose and treat.

Cystic fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis (CF) in the lung causes the formation 
of  thick  and  sticky  mucus,  which  blocks  airway  and 

Figure 7. Extracellular DNA in Enterococcus faecalis 
biofilm. Visualization of labeled strands by using an 
anti-dsDNA monoclonal antibody conjugated to an 
immunogold particle (asterisks; scale bar = 250 nm). 
Reproduced from [59].

www.future-science.com

499

future science groupReview    Rabin, Zheng, Opoku-Temeng, Du, Bonsu & Sintim

Planktonic cells

Dispersion

Attachment

Microcolony

Mature biofilm

Figure 8. Biofilm formation process.
makes it hard for patients breath [74]. Eighty percent of 
CF patients are chronically infected by P. aeruginosa. 
Medical  instruments,  devices  and  tools  can  also  be 
contaminated  with  P.  aeruginosa.  Several  cases  of 
hospital-acquired  P.  aeruginosa  infections  have  been 
reported [75,76], but unfortunately, there are not many 
good antibiotics that are available for treating recalci-
trant P. aeruginosa infection [77]. For patients who are 
infected with P. aeruginosa, antibiotic treatment often 
relieves  the  symptom  of  the  infection  but  not  neces-
sarily cures the infection. The lack of complete cure is 
mainly due to P. aeruginosa biofilms that act as reser-
voirs for disease recurrence [78]. This calls for the devel-
opment of drugs that can act on P. aeruginosa biofilms. 
These future drugs could either kill the bacteria in the 
biofilm or cause the dispersal of the biofilm into plank-
tonic  state  and  by  that  enabling  drugs  that  work  on 
planktonic bacteria to take effect [79]. Beyond acting as 
disease reservoirs, the components of biofilms, such as 
the major polysaccharide of P. aeruginosa matrix (algi-
nate), are virulence factors. For example, alginate can 
cause lung damage [80].

Dental plaque
Biofilms play an important role in dentistry and there 
have been many studies on dental biofilms [81,82]. Over 
700 species of bacteria and archaea have been reported 
to exist in dental plaque [83,84]. Dental plaque is actually 
composed  of  mixed  biofilms  [85].  However,  the  com-
position  of  the  healthy  plaque  biofilm  is  significantly 
different from disease-associated plaque biofilms.

The mouth is a unique microenvinronment that is 
characterized by water, temperature fluctuations, hard 
surface,  and  carbon  and  nitrogen  input.  Changes  in 
the  local  environment  influence  the  biofilm  bacterial 
composition. Acid is a major cause of tooth decay and 
innocuous bacteria species in healthy biofilms, includ-
ing Streptococcus sanguis, Streptococcus gordonii, Strep-
tococcus oralis, Actinomyces species, etc. often show low 
acid tolerance  [86]. On the contrary, bacteria involved 
in dental caries, such as S. sobrinus and S. mutans, have 
very  high  acid  tolerance.  These  acid-tolerant  bacte-
ria that can also form robust biofilms are responsible 

500

Future Med. Chem. (2015) 7(4)

for  many  oral  cavity  diseases,  such  as  dental  caries, 
periodontitis, gingivitis, etc. [87].

Communication among bacteria is essential for ini-
tial  colonization  and  successive  biofilm  formation  on 
the  enamel  surfaces.  If  bacteria  do  not  retain  on  the 
tooth surface, the bacteria are washed with the mouth 
fluid.  If  they  do  manage  to  hold  to  the  surface,  they 
organized  as  a  multispecies  to  form  a  dental  plaque. 
Oral microorganisms adhere to surfaces such as teeth, 
epithelial  tissues  or  to  other  bacteria  that  is  immobi-
lized on the surface (coadhesion). Cell–cell interaction 
between genetically distinct cells can also occur in sus-
pension (coaggregation). Oral bacteria have at least one 
coaggregation partner. A diagram illustrating competi-
tion and co-operation among early and late colonizers 
of the tooth is shown in Figure 9. The initial colonizers 
are  streptococci  and  actinomyces  [88,89].  Receptors  are 
recognized by the primary colonizers of dental plaque. 
Among the receptors are found phosphate-rich proteins 
such as statherin, and enzymes such as α-amylase. Strep-
tococci recognize receptors in the salivary pellicle (coats 
the  enamel).  Actinomyces  bind  to  proline-rich  pro-
teins  and  statherin  (Figure  9).  Fusobacteria,  anaerobic 
Gram-negative bacteria, also bind to statherin.

Bacteria  communicate  in  the  oral  biofilm  through 
the  secretion  and  accumulation  of  small  molecules. 
Autoinducer  (AI)-2  is  a  universal  intergeneric  signal-
ing  molecule  that  plays  an  important  role  in  biofilm 
development [91,92]. AI-2 stimulates the coaggregation 
of S. oralis and Actinomyces oris T14V. Small concen-
trations of AI-2 are sufficient for coaggregation of oral 
bacteria, less for oral pathogens. As the cell density of 
the  commensal  bacteria  increases,  the  AI-2  concen-
tration  increases.  At  the  highest  concentration,  the 
pathogens grow and develop the biofilm. At low con-
centration the conditions do not support their growth. 
Fusobacteria  produce  high  levels  of  AI-2,  then  coag-
gregate  with  variety  of  colonizers  and  become  domi-
nant bacteria in biofilms associate with healthy gums 
and plaque.

Wounds
Biofilms are commonly found in chronic wounds [93]. 
Compared  with  an  acute  wound,  which  is  usually 
not associated with biofilm, a biofilm-related chronic 
wound  persists  and  only  slowly  heals.  Biofilms  usu-
ally form on the outer layer of wounds but some bio-
films are also embedded in the deep layers of a wound, 
such as P. aeruginosa biofilms, and they are difficult to 
diagnose using a traditional wound swab culture [71].

Urinary infection
Biomaterials  in  the  urinary  tract,  such  as  catheters, 
increase  the  chance  of  bacterial  biofilm  formation, 

future science groupBiofilm formation mechanisms & targets for developing antibiofilm agents    Review

i

l

s
r
e
z
n
o
o
c
e
t
a
L

16

14

13

17

18

19

14

18

20

20

21

14

22

11

12

i

s
r
e
z
n
o
o
c

l

y
l
r
a
E

20

5

3

6

4

2

7

1

15

14

9

8

9

10

3

Statherin

Bacterial cell
fragment

Sialylated
mucins

Salivary
agglutinin

α-amylase

Proline-rich
protein

Salaivary pellicle

Tooth surface

1. Streptococcus oralis and 
Streptococcus sanguinis
2. Streptococcus  mitis
3. Streptococcus gordonii
4. Capnocytophaga ochraccea
5. Propionibacterium acnes
6. Haemophilus parainfluenzae
7. Prevotella loescheii
8. Veillonella spp.
9. Actinomyces oris and
Actinomyces naeslundii
10. Eikenella corrodens
11. Actinomyces israelii
12. Capnocytophaga gingivalis
13. Capnocytophaga sputigena
14. Fusobacterium nucleatum
15.  Prevotella denticola
16.  Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans
17.  Eubacterium spp. 
18. Treponema denticola
19. Tannerella forsythia
20. Porphyromonas gingivalis
21. Prevotella intermedia
22. Selenomonas flueggei

Figure 9. Oral bacterial colonization. Spatiotemporal model of oral bacterial colonization showing recognition of salivary pellicle 
receptors by initial colonizing bacteria and coaggregations between initial colonizers, fusobacteria and late colonizers of the tooth 
surface. Collectively, these interactions are proposed to represent development of dental plaque. Starting at the bottom, initial 
colonizers, Streptococcus gordonii, Streptococcus mitis, Streptococcus oralis and Streptococcus sanguinis, bind to complementary 
salivary receptors (sialylated mucins, proline-rich protein, α-amylase, salivary agglutinin and bacterial cell fragments) in the acquired 
pellicle coating the tooth surface. Late colonizers bind to previously bound bacteria. Sequential binding results in the appearance 
of nascent surfaces that bridge with the next coaggregating partner cell. Coaggregation is different from aggregation that occurs 
between genetically identical cells and from agglutination of cells through interaction of cells with soluble molecules, for example, 
antibodies. Most coaggregations are between cells of different genera; Fusobacterium nucleatum strains, for example, coaggregate 
intergenerically with representatives of all oral bacterial species. However, intrageneric coaggregation among fusobacterial strains 
is only rarely observed. In sharp contrast, streptococci exhibit broad intrageneric coaggregation partnerships (e.g., S. gordonii and 
S. oralis) as well as intraspecies partnerships (e.g., S. gordonii DL1 and S. gordonii 38). Each bacterial strain exhibits specificity in 
partners. For example, some streptococci are capable of coaggregating with certain Veillonella spp., whereas other streptococci 
cannot coaggregate with those veillonellae but do coaggregate with a separate group of veillonellae. 
Reproduced with permission from [90] © Macmillan Publishers Ltd (2010).

leading  to  urinary  infection  [94].  The  synthetic 
foreign body provides surfaces for bacteria to attach. 
Almost  all  urinary  catheters  (both  the  inner  and 
outer  surfaces)  are  infected  with  bacterial  biofilms 
(Figure 10). These biofilms, for example, P. mirabilis 
biofilms,  which  can  be  crystalline  in  nature,  can 
block  catheters  and  patients  have  to  replace  the 
blocked catheters [95].

Prosthetic joint infection
Bacteria causing prosthetic joint infection are usually 
Gram-positive, such as staphylococci  [96]. Most often 
immediately after surgery, bacteria (which could come 
from blood or the lymph) attach to the surface of pros-
thetic joints to form biofilms. Unlike typical bacterial 

infections that give symptoms like fever, it could take 
a  while  before  symptoms  of  the  biofilms  on  these 
implants, such as pain, emerge [97].

Cardiac valve infection
Bacterial biofilm on mechanical cardiac valve causes a 
disease called prosthetic valve endocarditis. The species 
involved in endocarditis are S. epidermidis, S. aureus, 
Streptococcus  spp.,  Corynebacterium  spp.,  Enterococcus 
spp.  and  Candida  spp  [98].  Accumulated  biofilm  can 
disrupt or block the artificial cardiac valve, resulting in 
diminished flow, turbulence or even leaking. Detached 
biofilm cells can migrate along with the blood stream 
and cause infection in other organs. Biofilm fragments 
in the blood circulation can block blood at the terminal 

www.future-science.com

501

future science group 
 
Review    Rabin, Zheng, Opoku-Temeng, Du, Bonsu & Sintim

A

B

Figure 10. Biofilm on urethral stents. Scanning electron 
microscopic picture of a developing biofilm on urethral 
stents that is lying completely within the urinary tract.  
Reproduced with kind permission from [94] © Springer 
Science and Business Media (2006).

points, such as the brain and kidney.

Biofilm resistance to antibiotics & host 
immune system
Bacteria  in  a  biofilm  are  more  resistant  to  antibiot-
ics or the reactive molecules that are produced by the 
host immune systems than planktonic bacteria. It has 
been estimated that biofilm cells can be up to 10,000 
times  more  resistant  to  antibiotics  than  planktonic 
cells  [99,100].  Costerton  and  coworkers  observed  that 
when  they  treated  P.  aeruginosa  biofilm  and  plank-
tonic  cells  with  tobramycin,  planktonic  cells  could 
not  survive  greater  than  50  μg/ml  tobramycin,  but 
biofilm cells could tolerate 1 mg/ml tobramycin  [100]. 
Abee  and  coworkers  also  reported  that  with  two  dif-
ferent  disinfectants,  benzalkonium  chloride  and 
the  oxidizing  agent  sodium  hypochlorite,  the  effec-
tive  inhibitory  concentrations  on  S.  aureus  biofilms 
are  50-  and  600-times  higher  than  planktonic  cells, 
respectively  [101].  The  reason(s)  for  increased  antibi-
otic resistance by bacterial biofilms is/are not yet fully 
understood. It is highly probable that multiple factors 
work together to protect biofilm cells from antibiotic 
treatment. Some of the possible mechanisms for anti-
biotic  resistance  exhibited  by  bacterial  biofilms  are 
as follows.

Limited antibiotic penetration
As  previously  described,  EPS  matrix  plays  an  impor-
tant  role  in  antibiotic  resistance  by  limiting  antimi-
crobial  agents’  penetration  into  the  biofilm.  Charged 
polysaccharides  and  eDNA  can  trap  several  kinds  of 
antibiotics.  The  penetration  property  of  antibiotics 
has  been  measured  by  the  concentration  at  the  base 
of the biofilm by Suci and coworkers. Results showed 
that  ciprofloxacin  concentration  in  P.  aeruginosa  bio-
film  was  dramatically  reduced,  but  not  completely 
blocked  [102]. Steward and coworkers investigated the 
penetration  limitation  of  ampicillin  and  ciprofloxa-
cin on K. pneumoniae. Ciprofloxacin has a much bet-
ter penetration capability than ampicillin. As a result, 

502

Future Med. Chem. (2015) 7(4)

biofilm cells could tolerate concentrated ampicillin but 
their resistance to ciprofloxacin is poor [103].

Horizontal gene transfer
Some  bacteria  can  acquire  antibiotic  resistance  via 
random mutations on genes. Others also harbor anti-
biotic-resistant  genes  on  plasmids.  Plasmids  can  be 
easily passed on to other cells by horizontal gene trans-
fer. In biofilms, the frequencies of horizontal plasmid 
transfer  are  much  higher  than  between  planktonic 
cells.  Studies  on S.  aureus  biofilms  showed  that  bio-
films promote the spread of plasmid-borne antibiotic 
resistance genes by conjugation/mobilization [104].

Reduced growth rate
There  is  limited  availability  of  oxygen  and  nutrients 
inside  biofilms,  so  biofilm  cells,  especially  those  in 
the deep layers, have a slow metabolic rate, as well as 
growth  rate  and  division  rate.  These  features  make 
biofilm  bacteria  insensitive  to  antibiotic  drugs  that 
target  dividing  cells.  For  example,  the  targets  of 
β-lactams  are  dividing  cells,  so  when  they  are  used 
on  E.  coli  biofilms,  their  bacteriolytic  activity  is 
diminished [105].

Persister cells
In  biofilms,  there  is  a  small  subpopulation  of  cells 
called persister cells [106,107]. Their growth rate is zero 
or extremely slow. Most of the antibiotics that are cur-
rently used in the clinic, which target processes that 
are relevant for cell growth or division, are not effec-
tive against persister cells. Therefore, these cells act as 
disease reservoirs that could reactivate into infectious 
particles once the antibiotic stress has been removed.

Efflux pumps
Efflux  pumps  allow  bacteria  cells  to  pump  intracel-
lular  toxins  out,  including  antibiotic  drugs.  Efflux 
pumps are also expressed in planktonic cells, but some 
efflux  pump  genes  are  upregulated  in  biofilm,  indi-
cating  that  they  contribute  to  antibiotic  resistance. 
Zhang and coworkers identified a novel P. aeruginosa 
efflux  pump  gene  PA1874–1877  and  the  expression 
level of PA1874–1877 gene in biofilm is much higher 
than  in  planktonic  cells  [108].  Efflux  pump  encoded 
by  this  gene  increases  the  resistance  to  tobramycin, 
gentamicin and ciprofloxacin.

EPS matrix protection
EPS  matrix  provides  physical  protection  to  the 
aggregated  biofilm  cells.  Lei  and  coworkers  showed 
that exopolysaccharide alginate in P. aeruginosa bio-
films  kept  biofilm  bacteria  from  human  leukocyte 
killing [109].

future science groupBiofilm formation mechanisms & targets for developing antibiofilm agents    Review

Signaling in biofilm formation
Quorum sensing
In order to form a biofilm, bacteria have to synchronize 
their gene expression and some use quorum-sensing 
(QS)  systems  to  achieve  this.  QS  is  a  mechanism  by 
which  bacteria  apparently  monitor  cell  density  and 
regulate  collective  behaviors  [110].  It  is  worth  point-
ing out that the issue of bacterial population monitor-
ing via QS is still hotly debated and many alternative 
hypotheses  have  been  proposed  for  the  role  of  mole-
cules  that  are  involved  in  QS  [111].  Bacterial  popula-
tions  coordinate  their  gene  expression  by  producing 
and responding to a variety of intra and intercellular 
signals  termed  ‘autoinducers’  [112].  Bacteria  ‘talk’  to 
each other using chemicals for ‘words’ including small 
molecules (Figure 11A). For example, acyl-homoserine 
lactones  (AHLs)  mediate  QS  in  Gram-negative  bac-
teria.  There  are  several  types  of  AHL,  depending  on 
the length and functionalization of the acyl side chain. 
Small peptides regulate QS-mediated gene expression 
in Gram-positive bacteria and AI-2 mediate QS in both 
Gram-positive  and  Gram-negative  bacteria,  although 
its role in cell signaling is still controversial [113]. At low 
cell  densities,  a  small  amount  of  autoinducer  is  pres-
ent in the extracellular media; however, it is too dilute 
to  be  detected.  As  cell  density  increases,  the  autoin-
ducer  concentration  reaches  a  threshold  and  at  this 
point the autoinducer/regulatory protein (the receptor) 

Key term

Quorum sensing: Cell – cell communication process that 
regulates gene expression at high cell density. At high 
cell density the concentration of an autoinducer, which is 
secreted by the bacteria to the environment, reaches to 
a certain threshold, which leads to gene expression and 
regulation of diverse physiological activities.

complex acts to induce or repress expression of target 
genes (Figure 11B) [114]. QS controls diverse physiologi-
cal processes: for example, bioluminescence, secretion 
of virulence factors, biofilm formation, antibiotic resis-
tance and more. QS has been shown to regulate bioflm 
formation in several bacterial species [115].

In PAO1 strain of P. aeruginosa, AHL QS systems 
are responsible for eDNA release and for biofilm struc-
ture [116]. In PA14 strain, the QS system regulates the 
production of PEL exopolysaccharide [117]. In S. aureus, 
the  QS  system  regulates  biofilm  dispersal.  The  QS 
molecule in S. aureus is a peptide (AIP) derived from 
the product of the agrD gene, which is then detected by 
AgrC and activate the regulator AgrA. AgrA regulates 
the transcription of genes that code proteases that are 
involved in biofilm dispersal [118,119]. In B. subtilis, the 
QS molecule surfactin is important for biofilm forma-
tion [120]. Surfactin causes potassium leakage from the 
cytoplasm  which  triggers  the  expression  of  the  genes 
involved in extracellular matrix production.

A

R

O

(CH2)n

N
H

O

O

O

MS

R = -H, -OH, = O; n = 3-11

Y

S T C Y

AHLs

AIPs

B Autoinducer

I
F

OH
B
O

OH
O

HO

O

HO

O

AI-2

Receptor

Synthase

Receptor

Gene
expression

• Biofilm formation
• Motility
• Virulence
• Pigment production
• Luminescence

Figure 11. Quorum sensing. (A) Main quorum-sensing autoinducers. (B) Quorum-sensing circuit. 
AHL: Acylhomoserine lactone; AIP: Autoinducing peptide; AI: Autoinducer. 

www.future-science.com

503

future science groupReview    Rabin, Zheng, Opoku-Temeng, Du, Bonsu & Sintim

Diguanylate
cyclase

2GTP

O

NH

N

NH2

O

OH O

-
O

O

P

N

N

O

O

N

N

OH

O

O
-

P

O

O

C-di-GMP

H2N

N

HN

O

Phosphodiesterases

2GMP

Biofilm formation

Motility

Figure 12. Cyclic dinucleotide signaling pathway.
c-di-GMP
C-di-GMP has emerged as an important second mes-
senger involved in biofilm formation. It was originally 
found  to  allosterically  activate  cellulose  synthase  in 
Acetobacter xylinus [121,122]. This signaling molecule has 
been found to modulate a variety of bacterial growth 
phenotypes  including  but  not  limited  to  biofilm  for-
mation, motility and virulence factor production [123]. 
In  the  cell,  c-di-GMP  is  synthesized  from  two  GTP 
molecules  by  diguanylate  cyclases  characterized  by  a 
GGDEF domain, a set of highly conserved active site 
residues,  whereas  the  second  messenger  is  degraded 
into  pGpG  or  GMP  by  phosphodiesterases  (PDEs) 
containing EAL domain or HD-GYP domain, respec-
tively  (Figure 12)  [122,124–127]. These enzymes function 
in concert to regulate the intracellular c-di-GMP levels.
The  correlation  between  intracellular  c-di-GMP 
concentration and biofilm formation has been observed 
in  several  clinically  relevant  bacteria  (Table  1).  For  a 
detailed  review  of  how  fluctuating  levels  of  cellular 

c-di-GMP  affect  biofilm  formation  and  some  effec-
tor systems involved, the reader is referred to an excel-
lent review by Boyd and O’Toole [128]. Briefly, in most 
bacteria the transition from motile to sessile mode of 
life is regulated by various effector proteins that bind 
c-di-GMP  resulting  in  varying  outputs  via  cell–sur-
face  protein  localization,  protein–protein  interaction, 
transcriptional activation and DNA binding [128]. In P. 
fluorescens, biofilm formation is initiated when an inner 
membrane effector protein, LapD binds cellular c-di-
GMP to facilitate the transport of the biofilm adhesion 
LapA  to  the  cell  surface  [129,130].  Other  studies  have 
revealed that in the presence of RapA PDE (suggesting 
decreased  cellular  c-di-GMP  levels),  the  secretion  of 
LapA is inhibited and hence biofilm formation is abol-
ished [131]. A protein–protein interaction was observed 
in E. coli, with YcgR protein integrating cellular c-di-
GMP  levels  and  interacting  with  components  of  the 
flagellar  motor  to  modulate  motile-to-sessile  transi-
tion  [132–134]. Other studies showed that a VieS/VieA 

Table 1. Clinically relevant bacteria that use c-di-GMP second messenger.

Bacteria

Vibrio cholerae

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

Yersinia pestis

Klebsiella pneumoniae

Diseases

Cholera

Pulmonary and urinary tracts infections 
Burn injuries infections 
Blood infections

Plague of Justinian 
Black Death 
Third Pandemic

Pneumonia 
Urinary tract 
Lower biliary tract Wound infections

Legionella pneumophila

Legionnaires’ disease

Vibrio vulnificus

Cellulitis 
Septicemia

Ref.

 [127]

 [137]

[138]

 [139]

[140]

 [141]

504

Future Med. Chem. (2015) 7(4)

future science groupBiofilm formation mechanisms & targets for developing antibiofilm agents    Review

sensor  kinase/response  regulator  pair  function  to 
reduce  cellular  c-di-GMP  concentration  and  inhibit 
biofilm formation in Vibrio cholerae [135]. It was deter-
mined  that  VieA  PDE  degraded  c-di-GMP  when 
phosphorylated by VieS sensor kinase. The decreased 
cellular  c-di-GMP  concentration  was  concomitant 
with  a  repressed  expression  of  vps  (vibro  exopolysac-
charide sysnthesis) genes, responsible for EPS synthesis 
and biofilm formation in V. cholerae [135,136]. Previous 
studies also observed an increased vps gene expression 
and subsequent induction of biofilm formation either 
by  overexpression  of  putative  diguanylate  cyclases  or 
inactivation of VieA PDE; both of which correspond 
to a high cellular c-di-GMP concentration [127].

sRNAs
Small noncoding RNAs (sRNAs) also play an impor-
tant role in the bacterial regulatory networks controlling 
the switch between planktonic mode and biofilm mode. 
The  regulatory  functions  of  sRNAs  are  achieved  by 
base pairing with other RNAs or binding with proteins. 
After  Romeo  and  coworkers  found  the  RNA-binding 
proteins CsrA and sRNA CsrB and revealed their roles 
in E. coli biofilm formation and dispersal [142–144], more 
sRNAs have been identified to participate in the biofilm 
regulatory networks in many bacteria.

One  well-studied  example  is  P.  aeruginosa  GAC 
signal-transduction  network  (Figure  13).  GacS  is  a 
transmembrane  sensor  kinase,  which  induces  the 
phosphorylation of its cognate regulator, GacA. GacA 
phosphorylation  is  also  promoted  by  sensor  kinase 
LadS and blocked by RetS [145]. Phosphorylated GacA 
stimulates  the  production  of  two  sRNAs:  RsmY  and 
RsmZ  [146].  RsmY  and  RsmZ  have  multiple  binding 
sites  for  the  regulatory  protein  RsmA.  As  a  transla-
tional  repressor,  RsmA  binds  to  the  target  mRNAs 
to promote bacterial motility and repress biofilm for-
mation. Sequestration of RsmA by sRNAs RsmY and 
RsmZ switches planktonic mode to biofilm formation.
The  first  identified  global  biofilm  regulator  is 
CsrA  [142]. The structure of CsrA regulatory network 
in E. coli is similar to the previously described RsmA 
system. CsrA’s target mRNA binding ability is inhib-
ited by two sRNAs, CsrB and CsrC. In the absence of 
CsrB and CsrC sRNAs, CsrA represses mRNA trans-
lation  and  leads  to  increased  cell  motility.  CsrB  and 
CsrC  sRNAs  trap  CsrA,  enable  mRNA  translation 
and promote biofilm formation [148].

Another  master  biofilm  regulator  in  E.  coli  and 
S. Typhimurium is CsgD. CsgD regulation is at tran-
scriptional  level,  by  selectively  activating  curli  fim-
briae  and  extracellular  polysaccharides  genes  and 
repressing  flagella  genes  [149].  The  activity  of  CsgD 
is  under  the  regulation  of  sRNAs  (McaS,  RprA, 

RetS

GacS

LadS

GacA

P

GacA

RsmY

RsmZ

RsmA

Planktonic mode

Biofilm formation

Figure 13. Pseudomonas aeruginosa GAC regulatory 
network. The phosphorylation of regulatory protein 
GacA is activated by GacS and LadS, but inhibited by 
RetS. Phosphorylated GacA promotes the production of 
two sRNAs, RsmY and RsmZ. RsmY and RsmZ sequester 
RsmA and block its mRNA-binding function. In the 
absence of RsmY and RsmZ, RsmA binds to target 
mRNA, prevents translation and resulted in increased 
cell motility and decreased biofilm formation.  
Adapted from [147].

~20 µm

5 µm

Figure 14. Biofilm aggregates of Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa in a chronic infected cystic fibrosis lung. 
Using a specific P. aeruginosa PNA fluorescence in situ 
hybridization probe, the bacteria are visualized in red, 
whereas the inflammatory cells surrounding the biofilm 
patches are counterstained with 4’,6-diamidino-2-
phenylindole, DAPI (blue). 
Reproduced with permission from [158] © Wiley-Liss, Inc. 
(2009).

www.future-science.com

505

future science groupReview    Rabin, Zheng, Opoku-Temeng, Du, Bonsu & Sintim

A

B

C

506

Future Med. Chem. (2015) 7(4)

Figure 15. Evidence of catheter-associated biofilm 
growth in vivo. (A) Original magnification ×200 
demonstrating the irregular undulating pattern of the 
biofilm surface. (B) Higher magnification of a tower 
from the image shown in (A) revealing a predominantly 
hollow interior with numerous cocci at the margins 
(original magnification ×800). The image has been 
pseudocolored to highlight Staphylococcus aureus 
(gold) and presumably matrix material (green), which 
likely aggregated during the SEM dehydration process, 
from remaining biofilm structure (gray). The smooth 
surface at the upper right represents the catheter 
(salmon) with biofilm visible on the internal face. (C) 
Original magnification ×3000 of an Staphylococcus 
aureus cluster within the tower depicted in (B). 
SEM:Scanning electron microscopy. 
Reproduced with permission from [7] © The American 
Association of Immunologists, Inc. (2011).
OmrA/OmrB,  GcvB,  etc.).  These  sRNAs  are  pro-
duced in response to different environmental condi-
tions.  Some  sRNAs  act  as  CsgB  repressors,  such  as 
OmrA/OmrB,  but  some  are  CsgB  activators,  such 
as ArcZ [150].

For  more  detailed 

information,  the  reader 

is 
referred to a more thorough review of the role of small 
regulatory RNAs and biofilm formation by Chambers 
and Sauer [151].

Biofilms in vivo
The dynamics of the microenvironment in vivo is dif-
ferent from that seen in vitro. This raises the question 
of whether observations from in vitro experiments are 
directly  amenable  to  in  vivo  studies.  It  is  therefore 
important  to  study  biofilms  in  vivo.  Animal  models 
such  as  mice  [152,153],  rabbits  [154]  and  rats  [155]  have 
been used to investigate the effects of biofilm-mediated 
infections.  It  is  important  to  note  that  these  models 
may not exactly depict conditions in a human host but 
can provide good predictive power.

One of such infection caused by P. aeruginosa is the 
catheter-associated urinary tract infection. Cole et al. 
demonstrated  that  the  biofilms  formed  in  a  murine 
model  of  catheter-associated  urinary  tract  infection 
were independent of extracellular polysaccharides [156]. 
This observation was achieved by using mutant PA14 
and PAO1 strains, which lacked the ability to produce 
exopolysaccharides.  The  biofilm  formed  was  found 
to  be  composed  of  eDNA,  as  DNAse  1  treatment 
decreased the biofilm. Watters et al. used streptozoto-
cin to induce diabetes in healthy mice. They infected a 
surgical excision wound with P. aeruginosa PAO1 and 
investigated the effect of the infection on the murine 
model wound healing [157]. It was observed that wound 
healing for diabetic mice was slow relative to healthy 
mice.  Analysis  of  tissue  extract  of  wound  from  dia-
betic  mice  revealed  aggregates  of  P.  aeruginosa.  The 
biofilm  did  not  respond  to  gentamicin  treatment  as 

future science groupBiofilm formation mechanisms & targets for developing antibiofilm agents    Review

was  expected.  P.  aeruginosa  biofilms  are  also  known 
to  cause  CF.  Bjarnsholt  et  al.  showed  using  various 
imaging  techniques  that  P.  aeruginosa  biofilms  were 
localized in the conductive zone of CF-infected lungs 
as opposed to the respiratory zone, which is enriched 
with  polymorphonuclear  leukocytes  (Figure  14)  [158]. 
In  the  conductive  zone,  the  study  suggested  that  the 
mucoid biofilms formed by the bacteria in the mucus 
are protected from antibiotics and host defense.

In an earlier study, Dalton et al. seeded multispecies 
biofilms  from  an  in  vitro  culture  into  the  wounds  of 
mice to generate a polymicrobial wound infection [152]. 
This study also observed an impaired wound healing of 
wounded mice infected with the multispecies biofilm, 
and an increased tolerance to antimicrobial treatment. 
The in vitro-to-in vivo multispecies biofilm was made 
up of S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, E. faecalis and Finegoldia 
magna.  It  was  observed  within  48  h  postup  that  P. 
aeruginosa  took  over  the  infection  and  was  typically 
present at the leading edge of the infection.

The response of the innate immunity system to bio-
film infection has been investigated. S. aureus biofilms 
were established on surgically implanted catheters in a 
mouse model  (Figure 15)  [7]. The study observed that 
the biofilms evaded TLR2 and TLR9 which are bacte-
rial recognition receptors used by macrophages. Host 
inflammatory  responses  such  as  TNF-α,  IL-1β  and 
several others were found to be attenuated. The levels 
of iNOS, responsible for synthesizing reactive nitrogen 
intermediates which have microbicidal activities, were 
observed to be significantly reduced. A corresponding 
increase  in  arginase-1  expression  levels  was  observed. 
In  fact,  the  overall  response  of  the  innate  immunity 
was observed to be altered; a plausible explanation for 
the persistence of biofilms in vivo.

Conclusion & future perspective
A  major  setback  in  the  treatment  of  biofilm-related 
infections is the ineffectiveness of existing antibiotics 
due  to  the  protective  layers  built  by  cells  in  the  bio-
film. There is therefore limited antibiotic penetration, 
so  the  community  of  sedentary  cells  persists  even  in 
the presence of antibiotics effective against their motile 
counterparts. The dispersion of matured biofilms may 
primarily  require  the  disruption  of  the  EPS  matrix. 
Components  of  the  EPS  matrix  such  as  alginate,  Pel 
and  Psl  in  P.  aeruginosa  biofilms  could,  therefore,  be 
vital targets in the disruption of biofilm structure. With 
cells  exposed,  the  drug  compound  may  then  exhibit 
bactericidal activity or act by dispersing the cells. On 
the  other  hand,  the  formation  of  new  biofilms  could 
be inhibited by preventing initial processes like attach-
ment of cells to surfaces. This would be crucial in the 
development of medical and dental implants as they are 
easily colonized by biofilm-forming pathogenic bacte-
ria. Nevertheless, the gap between observations made 
from an in vitro model and an in vivo model continues 
to be problematic. Choice of animal model, depending 
on how closely related the model is to humans, would 
be a critical parameter in the successful development of 
any antibiofilm drug.

Open Access
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-

NonCommercial 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of this 

license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/

Financial & competing interests disclosure
We are grateful to NSF (CBET 1264509) and Camille Dreyfus 

Foundation (Teacher–Scholar fellowship to HOS) for funding. 

Y Zheng is supported by Kraybill biochemistry fellowship. The 

Executive summary

Background
•	 Biofilms are defined as aggregated microorganism communities attached to surfaces and embedded in a self-

produced matrix which is composed of extracellular polysaccharide, DNA and proteins.

•	 There are three steps in biofilm formation: attachment, maturation and dispersion.
•	 The biofilm structure provides the bacteria with the ability to tolerate harsh environmental conditions, 

resistance to antibiotics and host immune systems, and provides an optimal environment for extracellular DNA 
(plasmid) exchange.

•	 Various human diseases are related to biofilm. Biofilms play an important role in dental diseases.
Signaling in biofilm formation
•	 Bacteria synchronize their gene expression by producing and responding to autoinducers. Quorum sensing 

regulates bioflm formation in several bacterial species.

•	 c-di-GMP is a second messenger that modulates a variety of bacterial growth phenotypes including biofilm 

formation.

•	 sRNAs are also biofilm regulators
Biofilms in vivo
•	 The microenvironment in vivo is different from that in vitro. It is important to investigate biofilms inhibition 

in vivo in animal models.

www.future-science.com

507

future science groupReview    Rabin, Zheng, Opoku-Temeng, Du, Bonsu & Sintim

authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involve-

discussed  in  the  manuscript  apart  from  those  disclosed. 

ment with any organization or entity with a financial interest 

No  writing  assistance  was  utilized  in  the  production  of  this 

in  or  financial  conflict  with  the  subject  matter  or  materials 

manuscript.

References

1  Henrici AT. Studies of freshwater bacteria: I. A direct 

microscopic technique. J. Bacteriol. 25(3), 277–287 (1933).

2  Heukelekian H, Heller A. Relation between food 

concentration and surface for bacterial growth. J. Bacteriol. 
40 (4), 547–558 (1940).

3  Hoiby N, Flensborg E, Beck B, Friis B, Jacobsen S, Jacobsen 
L. Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in cystic fibrosis. 
Diagnostic and prognostic significance of Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa precipitins determined by means of crossed 
immunoelectrophoresis. Scand. J. Respir. Dis. 58(2), 65–79 
(1977).

4 

Costerton JW, Geesey GG, Cheng KJ. How bacteria stick. 
Sci. Am. 238(1), 86–95 (1978).

5  Deligianni E, Pattison S, Berrar D et al. Pseudomonas 

aeruginosa cystic fibrosis isolates of similar RAPD genotype 
exhibit diversity in biofilm forming ability in vitro. BMC 
Microbiol. 10, 38 (2010).

Ludecke C, Jandt KD, Siegismund D et al. Reproducible 
biofilm cultivation of chemostat-grown Escherichia coli and 
investigation of bacterial adhesion on biomaterials using a 
non-constant-depth film fermenter. PLoS One 9(1), e84837 
(2014).

Thurlow LR, Hanke ML, Fritz T et al. Staphylococcus aureus 
biofilms prevent macrophage phagocytosis and attenuate 
inflammation in vivo. J. Immunol. 186(11), 6585–6596 
(2011).

Pammi M, Liang R, Hicks JM, Barrish J, Versalovic J. 
Farnesol decreases biofilms of Staphylococcus epidermidis and 
exhibits synergy with nafcillin and vancomycin. Pediatr. 
Res. 70 (6), 578–583 (2011).

Annous BA, Fratamico PM, Smith JL. Scientific status 
summary. J. Food Sci. 74(1), R24–R37 (2009).

6 

7 

8 

9 

10  Metwalli KH, Khan SA, Krom BP, Jabra-Rizk MA. 

Streptococcus mutans Candida albicans and the human mouth: 
a sticky situation. PLoS Pathog. 9 (10), e1003616 (2013).

11 

Flemming HC, Neu TR, Wozniak DJ. The EPS matrix: the 
“house of biofilm cells”. J. Bacteriol. 189(22), 7945–7947 
(2007).

12  Zhang X, Bishop PL, Kupferle MJ. Measurement of 
polysaccharides and proteins in biofilm extracellular 
polymers. Water Sci. Technol. 37 (45), 345–348 (1998).

13  Nwodo UU, Green E, Okoh AI. Bacterial 

16  Prigent-Combaret C, Vidal O, Dorel C, Lejeune P. Abiotic 
surface sensing and biofilm-dependent regulation of 
gene expression in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 181(19), 
5993–6002 (1999).

17  Davies DG, Geesey GG. Regulation of the alginate 

biosynthesis gene algC in Pseudomonas aeruginosa during 
biofilm development in continuous culture. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 61(3), 860–867 (1995).

18  Grant WD, Sutherland IW, Wilkinson JF. Exopolysaccharide 
colanic acid and its occurrence in the Enterobacteriaceae. 
J. Bacteriol. 100(3), 1187–1193 (1969).

19 

Stevenson G, Andrianopoulos K, Hobbs M, Reeves PR. 
Organization of the Escherichia coli K-12 gene cluster 
responsible for production of the extracellular polysaccharide 
colanic acid. J. Bacteriol. 178(16), 4885–4893 (1996).

20  Reid AN, Whitfield C. Functional analysis of conserved gene 
products involved in assembly of Escherichia coli capsules 
and exopolysaccharides: evidence for molecular recognition 
between Wza and Wzc for colanic acid biosynthesis. 
J. Bacteriol. 187(15), 5470–5481 (2005).

21  Danese PN, Pratt LA, Kolter R. Exopolysaccharide 

production is required for development of Escherichia coli 
K-12 biofilm architecture. J. Bacteriol. 182(12), 3593–3596 
(2000).

22  Friedman L, Kolter R. Genes involved in matrix formation in 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 biofilms. Mol. Microbiol. 51(3), 
675–690 (2004).

23  Friedman L, Kolter R. Two genetic loci produce distinct 

carbohydrate-rich structural components of the Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa biofilm matrix. J. Bacteriol. 186(14), 4457–4465 
(2004).

24 

Jackson KD, Starkey M, Kremer S, Parsek MR, Wozniak DJ. 
Identification of psl, a locus encoding a potential 
exopolysaccharide that is essential for Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
PAO1 biofilm formation. J. Bacteriol. 186(14), 4466–4475 
(2004).

25  May TB, Shinabarger D, Maharaj R et al. Alginate synthesis 
by Pseudomonas aeruginosa: a key pathogenic factor in 
chronic pulmonary infections of cystic fibrosis patients. Clin. 
Microbiol. Rev. 4(2), 191–206 (1991).

26  Hodges NA, Gordon CA. Protection of Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa against ciprofloxacin and beta-lactams by 
homologous alginate. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 35(11), 
2450–2452 (1991).

exopolysaccharides: functionality and prospects. Int. J. Mol. 
Sci. 13(11), 14002–14015 (2012).

27 

14  Dawson LF, Valiente E, Faulds-Pain A, Donahue EH, 

Wren BW. Characterisation of clostridium difficile biofilm 
formation, a role for Spo0A. PLoS One 7(12), e50527 (2012).

15  Bales PM, Renke EM, May SL, Shen Y, Nelson DC. 

Purification and characterization of biofilm-associated EPS 
exopolysaccharides from ESKAPE organisms and other 
pathogens. PLoS One 8(6), e67950 (2013).

508

Future Med. Chem. (2015) 7(4)

Simpson JA, Smith SE, Dean RT. Alginate inhibition of the 
uptake of Pseudomonas aeruginosa by macrophages. J. Gen. 
Microbiol. 134(1), 29–36 (1988).

28  Ma L, Wang J, Wang S et al. Synthesis of multiple 

Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm matrix exopolysaccharides is 
post-transcriptionally regulated. Environ. Microbiol. 14(8), 
1995– 2005 (2012).

29  Coyne MJ, Russell KS, Coyle CL, Goldberg JB. 
The Pseudomonas aeruginosa algC gene encodes 

future science groupBiofilm formation mechanisms & targets for developing antibiofilm agents    Review

phosphoglucomutase, required for the synthesis of a complete 
lipopolysaccharide core. J. Bacteriol. 176(12), 3500–3507 
(1994).

30  Colvin KM, Irie Y, Tart CS et al. The Pel and Psl 

polysaccharides provide Pseudomonas aeruginosa structural 
redundancy within the biofilm matrix. Environ. 
Microbiol. 14(8), 1913–1928 (2012).

31  Franklin MJ, Nivens DE, Weadge JT, Howell PL. 

Biosynthesis of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa extracellular 
polysaccharides, alginate, Pel, and Psl. Front. Microbiol. 2, 
167 (2011).

32  Gacesa P. Bacterial alginate biosynthesis – recent progress 
and future prospects. Microbiology 144 (5), 1133–1143 
(1998).

33 

Stokke BT, Draget KI, SmidsrØd O, Yuguchi Y, Urakawa H, 
Kajiwara K. Small-angle x-ray scattering and rheological 
characterization of alginate Gels. 1. Ca-Alginate Gels. 
Macromolecules 33(5), 1853–1863 (2000).

34  Mack D, Fischer W, Krokotsch A et al. The intercellular 

adhesin involved in biofilm accumulation of Staphylococcus 
epidermidis is a linear beta-1,6-linked glucosaminoglycan: 
purification and structural analysis. J. Bacteriol. 178(1), 
175–183 (1996).

35  Cue DR, Lei MG, Lee C. Genetic regulation of the 

intercellular adhesion locus in staphylococci. Front. Cell. 
Infect. Microbiol. 2, 38 (2012).

36 

Stanley NR, Lazazzera BA. Defining the genetic differences 
between wild and domestic strains of Bacillus subtilis that 
affect poly-γ-dl-glutamic acid production and biofilm 
formation. Mol. Microbiol. 57(4), 1143–1158 (2005).

37  Branda SS, Chu F, Kearns DB, Losick R, Kolter R. A major 

protein component of the Bacillus subtilis biofilm matrix. 
Mol. Microbiol. 59 (4), 1229–1238 (2006).

38  FrØlund B, Palmgren R, Keiding K, Nielsen PH. Extraction 
of extracellular polymers from activated sludge using a cation 
exchange resin. Water Res. 30(8), 1749–1758 (1996).

39  Lynch DJ, Fountain TL, Mazurkiewicz JE, Banas JA. 
Glucan-binding proteins are essential for shaping 
Streptococcus mutans biofilm architecture. FEMS Microbiol. 
Lett. 268(2), 158–165 (2007).

40  Dueholm MS, SØndergaard MT, Nilsson M et al. Expression 
of Fap amyloids in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, P. fluorescens, 
and P. putida results in aggregation and increased biofilm 
formation. Microbiologyopen 2(3), 365–382 (2013).

41  Romero D, Aguilar C, Losick R, Kolter R. Amyloid fibers 

provide structural integrity to Bacillus subtilis biofilms. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107(5), 2230–2234 (2010).

42  Cucarella C, Solano C, Valle J, Amorena B, Lasa I, 

Penadés JR. Bap, a Staphylococcus aureus surface protein 
involved in biofilm formation. J. Bacteriol. 183(9), 
2888–2896 (2001).

43  Toledo-Arana A, Valle J, Solano C et al. The enterococcal 
surface protein, Esp, is involved in Enterococcus faecalis 
biofilm formation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67(10), 
4538–4545 (2001).

44  Lasa I, Penadés JR. Bap: a family of surface proteins involved 
in biofilm formation. Res. Microbiol. 157(2), 99–107 (2006).

45  Mora P, Rosconi F, Franco Fraguas L, Castro-Sowinski S. 

Azospirillum brasilense Sp7 produces an outer-membrane 
lectin that specifically binds to surface-exposed extracellular 
polysaccharide produced by the bacterium. Arch. 
Microbiol. 189(5), 519–524 (2008).

46  Diggle SP, Stacey RE, Dodd C, Cámara M, Williams P, 
Winzer K. The galactophilic lectin, LecA, contributes to 
biofilm development in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Environ. 
Microbiol. 8(6), 1095–1104 (2006).

47  Tielker D, Hacker S, Loris R et al. Pseudomonas aeruginosa 

lectin LecB is located in the outer membrane and is involved 
in biofilm formation. Microbiology 151(5), 1313–1323 
(2005).

48  Zhang X, Bishop PL. Biodegradability of biofilm extracellular 
polymeric substances. Chemosphere 50(1), 63–69 (2003).

49  Kaplan JB, Velliyagounder K, Ragunath C et al. Genes 
involved in the synthesis and degradation of matrix 
polysaccharide in Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans 
and Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae biofilms. 
J. Bacteriol. 186(24), 8213–8220 (2004).

50  Whitchurch CB, Tolker-Nielsen T, Ragas PC, Mattick JS. 

Extracellular DNA required for bacterial biofilm formation. 
Science 295(5559), 1487 (2002).

51  Hamilton HL, Domínguez NM, Schwartz KJ, Hackett KT, 
Dillard JP. Neisseria gonorrhoeae secretes chromosomal DNA 
via a novel type IV secretion system. Mol. Microbiol. 55(6), 
1704–1721 (2005).

52  Das T, Sharma PK, Busscher HJ, van der Mei HC, Krom BP. 
Role of extracellular DNA in initial bacterial adhesion 
and surface aggregation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76(10), 
3405–3408 (2010).

53  Gloag ES, Turnbull L, Huang A et al. Self-organization 
of bacterial biofilms is facilitated by extracellular DNA. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110(28), 11541–11546 (2013).

54  Lewenza S. Extracellular DNA-induced antimicrobial peptide 
resistance mechanisms in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Front. 
Microbiol. 4, 21 (2013).

55  Mulcahy H, Charron-Mazenod L, Lewenza S. Extracellular 
DNA chelates cations and induces antibiotic resistance 
in Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms. PLoS Pathog. 4(11), 
e1000213 (2008).

56 

Johnson L, Horsman SR, Charron-Mazenod L et al. 
Extracellular DNA-induced antimicrobial peptide resistance 
in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. BMC 
Microbiol. 13, 115 (2013).

57  Doroshenko N, Tseng BS, Howlin RP et al. Extracellular 

DNA impedes the transport of vancomycin in Staphylococcus 
epidermidis biofilms pre-exposed to sub-inhibitory 
concentrations of vancomycin. Antimicrob. Agents 
Chemother.58(12), 7273–7282 (2014).

58  Otto M. Staphylococcus epidermidis Pathogenesis. Methods 

Mol. Biol. 1106, 17–31 (2014). 

59  Barnes AMT, Ballering KS, Leibman RS, Wells CL, 
Dunny GM. Enterococcus faecalis produces abundant 
extracellular structures containing DNA in the absence of cell 
lysis during early biofilm formation. MBio. 3(4), e00193-12 
(2012).

www.future-science.com

509

future science groupReview    Rabin, Zheng, Opoku-Temeng, Du, Bonsu & Sintim

60 

Jefferson KK. What drives bacteria to produce a 
biofilm? FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 236(2), 163–173 (2004).

61  Rasmussen TB, Givskov M. Quorum-sensing inhibitors 

as anti-pathogenic drugs. Int. J. Med. Microbiol. 296(23), 
149–161 (2006).

62  Hausner M, Wuertz S. High rates of conjugation in 

78  Costerton JW, Stewart PS, Greenberg EP. Bacterial 

biofilms: a common cause of persistent infections. 
Science 284(5418), 1318–1322 (1999).

79  Moreau-Marquis S, Stanton BA, O’Toole GA. Pseudomonas 

aeruginosa biofilm formation in the cystic fibrosis airway. 
Pulm. Pharmacol. Ther. 21(4), 595–599 (2008).

bacterial biofilms as determined by quantitative in situ 
analysis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65(8), 3710–3713 
(1999).

80  Pedersen SS, HØiby N, Espersen F, Koch C. Role of 

alginate in infection with mucoid Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
in cystic fibrosis. Thorax 47(1), 6–13 (1992).

63  Palmer J, Flint S, Brooks J. Bacterial cell attachment, the 

81  Hojo K, Nagaoka S, Ohshima T, Maeda N. Bacterial 

beginning of a biofilm. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 34(9), 
577–588 (2007). 

interactions in dental biofilm development. J. Dent. 
Res. 88(11), 982–990 (2009).

64  Renner LD, Weibel DB. Physicochemical regulation of 

82  Marsh PD. Dental plaque as a microbial biofilm. Caries 

biofilm formation. MRS Bull. 36(5), 347–355  
(2011).

Res. 38(3), 204–211 (2004).

83  Marsh PD. Dental plaque as a biofilm and a microbial 

65 

Sutherland I. Biofilm exopolysaccharides: a strong and 
sticky framework. Microbiology 147(1), 3–9 (2001).

community – implications for health and disease. BMC 
Oral Health 6(Suppl 1), 14 (2006).

66  O’Toole GA, Kolter R. Flagellar and twitching motility are 
necessary for Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm development. 
Mol. Microbiol. 30(2), 295–304 (1998).

84  Zaura E, Keijser B, Huse S, Crielaard W. Defining the 

healthy “core microbiome” of oral microbial communities. 
BMC Microbiol. 9(1), 259 (2009).

67  Otto M. Staphylococcal biofilms. Curr. Top. 
Microbiol. Immunol. 207–228 (2008).

68  Heilmann C, Hussain M, Peters G, Götz F. Evidence for 
autolysin-mediated primary attachment of Staphylococcus 
epidermidis to a polystyrene surface. Mol. Microbiol. 24(5), 
1013–1024 (1997).

85  Li J, Helmerhorst EJ, Leone CW et al. Identification of 

early microbial colonizers in human dental biofilm. J. Appl. 
Microbiol. 97(6), 1311–1318 (2004).

86  Marquis RE. Oxygen metabolism, oxidative stress and 
acid–base physiology of dental plaque biofilms. J. Ind. 
Microbiol. 15(3), 198–207 (1995).

69  Davies DG, Chakrabarty AM, Geesey GG. 

87 

Exopolysaccharide production in biofilms: substratum 
activation of alginate gene expression by Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 59(4), 1181–1186 
(1993).

70  Garrett ES, Perlegas D, Wozniak DJ. Negative control 
of flagellum synthesis in Pseudomonas aeruginosa is 
modulated by the alternative sigma factor AlgT (AlgU). 
J. Bacteriol. 181(23), 7401–7404 (1999).

Sbordone L, Bortolaia C. Oral microbial biofilms and 
plaque-related diseases: microbial communities and their 
role in the shift from oral health to disease. Clin. Oral 
Investig. 7(4), 181–188 (2003).

88  Dige I, Nilsson H, Kilian M, Nyvad B. In situ 

identification of streptococci and other bacteria in initial 
dental biofilm by confocal laser scanning microscopy and 
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Eur. J. Oral Sci. 115(6), 
459–467 (2007).

71  Hall MR, McGillicuddy E, Kaplan LJ. Biofilm: basic 

principles, pathophysiology, and implications for clinicians. 
Surg. Infect. (Larchmt.) 15(1), 1–7 (2014).

89  Dige I, Raarup MK, Nyengaard JR, Kilian M, Nyvad B. 
Actinomyces naeslundii in initial dental biofilm formation. 
Microbiology 155(7), 2116–2126 (2009).

72  Fux CA, Costerton JW, Stewart PS, Stoodley P. Survival 
strategies of infectious biofilms. Trends Microbiol. 13(1), 
34–40 (2005).

73  Davies D. Understanding biofilm resistance to antibacterial 
agents. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2(2), 114–122 (2003).

74  Lyczak JB, Cannon CL, Pier GB. Lung infections associated 
with cystic fibrosis. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 15(2), 194–222 
(2002).

75  Pedersen SS, Koch C, HØiby N, Rosendal K. An epidemic 
spread of multiresistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa in a cystic 
fibrosis centre. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 17(4), 505–516 
(1986).

76 

Jones AM, Govan JR, Doherty CJ et al. Spread of a 
multiresistant strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in an adult 
cystic fibrosis clinic. Lancet 358(9281), 557–558 (2001).

90  Kolenbrander PE, Palmer RJ Jr, Periasamy S, Jakubovics 
NS. Oral multispecies biofilm development and the key 
role of cell–cell distance. Nat. Rev. Micro. 8(7), 471–480 
(2010). 

91  Hardie KR, Heurlier K. Establishing bacterial communities 
by ‘word of mouth’: LuxS and autoinducer 2 in biofilm 
development. Nat. Rev. Micro. 6(8), 635–643 (2008).

92  Bassler BL, Greenberg EP, Stevens AM. Cross-species 
induction of luminescence in the quorum-sensing 
bacterium Vibrio harveyi. J. Bacteriol. 179(12), 4043–4045 
(1997).

93 

James GA, Swogger E, Wolcott R et al. Biofilms in chronic 
wounds. Wound Repair Regen. 16(1), 37–44 (2008).

94  Tenke P, Kovacs B, Jäckel M, Nagy E. The role of biofilm 
infection in urology. World J. Urol. 24(1), 13–20 (2006).

77  Römling U, Fiedler B, Bosshammer J et al. Epidemiology of 
chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in cystic fibrosis. 
J. Infect. Dis. 170(6), 1616–1621 (1994).

95 

Jacobsen SM, Stickler DJ, Mobley HL, Shirtliff ME. 
Complicated catheter-associated urinary tract infections 
due to Escherichia coli and Proteus mirabilis. Clin. 
Microbiol. Rev. 21(1), 26–59 (2008).

510

Future Med. Chem. (2015) 7(4)

future science groupBiofilm formation mechanisms & targets for developing antibiofilm agents    Review

96  Matthews PC, Berendt AR, McNally MA, Byren I. 

Diagnosis and management of prosthetic joint infection. 
BMJ 338, b1773 (2009).

113  Rezzonico F, Duffy B. Lack of genomic evidence of AI-2 
receptors suggests a non-quorum sensing role for luxS in 
most bacteria. BMC Microbiol. 8, 154 (2008).

97  Trampuz A, Zimmerli W. Prosthetic joint infections: 
update in diagnosis and treatment. Swiss Med. 
Wkly. 135(1718), 243–251 (2005).

98  Khardori N, Yassien M. Biofilms in device-related 

infections. J. Ind. Microbiol. 15(3), 141–147 (1995).

114  Miller MB, Bassler BL. Quorum sensing in bacteria. Annu. 

Rev. Microbiol. 55(1), 165–199 (2001).

115  Romeo T, Irie Y, Parsek MR. Quorum sensing and microbial 
biofilms. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 67–84 (2008).

116  Allesen-Holm M, Barken KB, Yang L et al. A 

99  Costerton JW, Lewandowski Z, Caldwell DE, Korber 

DR, Lappin-Scott HM. Microbial Biofilms. Annu. Rev. 
Microbiol. 49(1), 711–745 (1995).

characterization of DNA release in Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
cultures and biofilms. Mol. Microbiol. 59(4), 1114–1128 
(2006).

100  Nickel JC, Ruseska I, Wright JB, Costerton JW. 

Tobramycin resistance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa cells 
growing as a biofilm on urinary catheter material. 
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 27(4), 619–624 (1985).

101  Luppens SB, Reij MW, van der Heijden RW, Rombouts 

FM, Abee T. Development of a standard test to assess 
the resistance of Staphylococcus aureus biofilm cells to 
disinfectants. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68(9), 4194–4200 
(2002).

102  Suci PA, Mittelman MW, Yu FP, Geesey GG. Investigation 
of ciprofloxacin penetration into Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
biofilms. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 38(9), 2125–2133 
(1994).

103  Anderl JN, Franklin MJ, Stewart PS. Role of antibiotic 
penetration limitation in Klebsiella pneumoniae biofilm 
resistance to ampicillin and ciprofloxacin. Antimicrob. 
Agents Chemother. 44(7), 1818–1824 (2000).

104  Savage VJ, Chopra I, O’Neill AJ. Staphylococcus aureus 
biofilms promote horizontal transfer of antibiotic 
resistance. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 57(4), 1968–1970 
(2013).

105  Ashby MJ, Neale JE, Knott SJ, Critchley IA. Effect of 

antibiotics on non-growing planktonic cells and biofilms of 
Escherichia coli. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 33(3), 443–452 
(1994).

106  Lewis K. Persister cells, dormancy and infectious disease. 

Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 5(1), 48–56 (2007).

107  Keren I, Shah D, Spoering A, Kaldalu N, Lewis K. 

Specialized persister cells and the mechanism of multidrug 
tolerance in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 186(24), 
8172–8180 (2004).

108  Zhang L, Mah TF. Involvement of a novel efflux 

system in biofilm-specific resistance to antibiotics. J. 
Bacteriol. 190(13), 4447–4452 (2008).

109  Leid JG, Willson CJ, Shirtliff ME, Hassett DJ, Parsek MR, 

Jeffers AK. The exopolysaccharide alginate protects 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm bacteria from IFN-
gamma-mediated macrophage killing. J. Immunol. 175(11), 
7512–7518 (2005).

110  Lyon GJ, Muir TW. Chemical signaling among bacteria 

and its inhibition. Chem. Biol. 10(11), 1007–1021 (2003).

111  West SA, Winzer K, Gardner A, Diggle SP. Quorum 
sensing and the confusion about diffusion. Trends 
Microbiol. 20(12), 586–594 (2012).

112  Camilli A, Bassler BL. Bacterial small-molecule signaling 

pathways. Science 311(5764), 1113–1116 (2006).

117  Sakuragi Y, Kolter R. Quorum-sensing regulation of the 
biofilm matrix genes (pel) of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. 
J. Bacteriol. 189(14), 5383–5386 (2007).

118  Boles BR, Horswill AR. Agr-mediated dispersal of 

Staphylococcus aureus biofilms. PLoS Pathog. 4(4), e1000052 
(2008).

119  Novick RP, Geisinger E. Quorum sensing in staphylococci. 

Annu. Rev. Genet. 42, 541–564 (2008).

120  López D, Fischbach MA, Chu F, Losick R, Kolter R. 

Structurally diverse natural products that cause potassium 
leakage trigger multicellularity in Bacillus subtilis. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 106(1), 280–285 (2009).

121  Weinhouse H, Sapir S, Amikam D et al. c-di-GMP-binding 
protein, a new factor regulating cellulose synthesis in 
Acetobacter xylinum. FEBS Lett. 416(2), 207–211 ( 1997). 

122  Ross P, Mayer R, Weinhouse H et al. The cyclic diguanylic 
acid regulatory system of cellulose synthesis in Acetobacter 
xylinum chemical synthesis and biological activity of cyclic 
nucleotide dimer, trimer, and phosphothioate derivatives. 
J. Biol. Chem. 265(31), 18933–18943 (1990).

123  Kalia D, Merey G, Nakayama S et al. Nucleotide, c-di-GMP, 
c-di-AMP, cGMP, cAMP, (p)ppGpp signaling in bacteria 
and implications in pathogenesis. Chem. Soc. Rev. 42(1), 
305–341 ( 2013). 

124  Ross P, Weinhouse H, Aloni Y et al. Regulation of cellulose 

synthesis in Acetobacter xylinum by cyclic diguanylic acid. 
Nature 325(6101), 279–281 (1987).

125  Ryjenkov DA, Tarutina M, Moskvin OV, Gomelsky M. 
Cyclic diguanylate is a ubiquitous signaling molecule in 
bacteria: insights into biochemistry of the GGDEF protein 
domain. J. Bacteriol. 187(5), 1792–1798 (2005).

126  Paul R, Weiser S, Amiot NC et al. Cell cycle-dependent 

dynamic localization of a bacterial response regulator with a 
novel di-guanylate cyclase output domain. Genes Dev. 18(6), 
715–727 (2004).

127  Tischler AD, Camilli A. Cyclic diguanylate regulates Vibrio 
cholerae virulence gene expression. Infect. Immun. 73(9), 
5873–5882 (2005).

128  Boyd CD, O’Toole GA. Second messenger regulation 
of biofilm formation: breakthroughs in understanding 
c-di-GMP effector systems. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 28, 
439–462 (2012).

129  Newell PD, Monds RD, O’Toole GA. LapD is a bis-(3′,5′)-
cyclic dimeric GMP-binding protein that regulates surface 
attachment by Pseudomonas fluorescens Pf0-1. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 106(9), 3461–3466 (2009).

www.future-science.com

511

future science groupReview    Rabin, Zheng, Opoku-Temeng, Du, Bonsu & Sintim

130  Newell PD, Boyd CD, Sondermann H, O’Toole GA. 

A c-di-GMP effector system controls cell adhesion by inside-
out signaling and surface protein cleavage. PLoS Biol. 9(2), 
e1000587 (2011).

131  Monds RD, Newell PD, Gross RH, O’Toole GA. 

Phosphate-dependent modulation of c-di-GMP levels 
regulates Pseudomonas fluorescens Pf0–1 biofilm formation 
by controlling secretion of the adhesin LapA. Mol. 
Microbiol. 63(3), 656–679 (2007).

132  Ryjenkov DA, Simm R, Römling U, Gomelsky M. The PilZ 
domain is a receptor for the second messenger c-di-GMP: 
the PilZ domain protein YcgR controls motility in 
enterobacteria. J. Biol. Chem. 281(41), 30310–30314 (2006).

133  Boehm A, Kaiser M, Li H et al. Second messenger-mediated 
adjustment of bacterial swimming velocity. Cell 141(1), 
107–116 (2010). 

134  Paul K, Nieto V, Carlquist WC, Blair DF, Harshey RM. The 
c-di-GMP binding protein YcgR controls flagellar motor 
direction and speed to affect chemotaxis by a “backstop 
brake” mechanism. Mol. Cell 38(1), 128–139 (2010). 

135  Martinez-Wilson HF, Tamayo R, Tischler AD, Lazinski 
DW, Camilli A. The Vibrio cholerae hybrid sensor kinase 
VieS contributes to motility and biofilm regulation by 
altering the cyclic diguanylate level. J. Bacteriol. 190(19), 
6439–6447 (2008).

136  Tamayo R, Tischler AD, Camilli A. The EAL Domain 
protein VieA is a cyclic diguanylate phosphodiesterase. 
J. Biol. Chem. 280(39), 33324–33330 (2005).

137  Simm R, Morr M, Kader A, Nimtz M, Römling U. 

GGDEF and EAL domains inversely regulate cyclic di-
GMP levels and transition from sessility to motility. Mol. 
Microbiol. 53(4), 1123–1134 (2004).

138  Kirillina O, Fetherston JD, Bobrov AG, Abney J, Perry RD. 
HmsP, a putative phosphodiesterase, and HmsT, a putative 
diguanylate cyclase, control Hms-dependent biofilm 
formation in Yersinia pestis. Mol. Microbiol. 54(1), 75–88 
(2004).

139  Wilksch JJ, Yang J, Clements A et al. MrkH, a novel 

c-di-GMP-dependent transcriptional activator, controls 
Klebsiella pneumoniae biofilm formation by regulating type 3 
fimbriae expression. PLoS Pathog. 7(8), e1002204 (2011). 

140  Carlson HK, Vance RE, Marletta MA. H-NOX regulation 

of c-di-GMP metabolism and biofilm formation in Legionella 
pneumophila. Mol. Microbiol. 77(4), 930–942 (2010).

141  Nakhamchik A, Wilde C, Rowe-Magnus DA. Cyclic-di-
GMP regulates extracellular polysaccharide production, 
biofilm formation, and rugose colony development by Vibrio 
vulnificus. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74(13), 4199–4209 
(2008).

142  Romeo T, Gong M, Liu MY, Brun-Zinkernagel AM. 

Identification and molecular characterization of csrA, a 
pleiotropic gene from Escherichia coli that affects glycogen 
biosynthesis, gluconeogenesis, cell size, and surface 
properties. J. Bacteriol. 175(15), 4744–4755 (1993).

143  Liu MY, Gui G, Wei B et al. The RNA molecule CsrB binds 
to the global regulatory protein CsrA and antagonizes its 
activity in Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 272(28), 17502–
17510 (1997).

144  Jackson DW, Suzuki K, Oakford L, Simecka JW, Hart ME, 
Romeo T. Biofilm formation and dispersal under the 
influence of the global regulator CsrA of Escherichia coli. J. 
Bacteriol. 184(1), 290–301 (2002).

145  Ventre I, Goodman AL, Vallet-Gely I et al. Multiple sensors 
control reciprocal expression of Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
regulatory RNA and virulence genes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 103(1), 171–176 (2006).

146  Kay E, Humair B, Dénervaud V et al. Two GacA-dependent 
small RNAs modulate the quorum-sensing response in 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Bacteriol. 188(16), 6026–6033 
(2006).

147  Jimenez PN, Koch G, Thompson JA, Xavier KB, Cool RH, 
Quax WJ. The multiple signaling systems regulating 
virulence in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. 
Rev. 76(1), 46–65 (2012).

148  Babitzke P, Romeo T. CsrB sRNA family: sequestration 
of RNA-binding regulatory proteins. Curr. Opin. 
Microbiol. 10(2), 156–163 (2007).

149  Ogasawara H, Yamamoto K, Ishihama A. Role of the biofilm 

master regulator CsgD in cross-regulation between biofilm 
formation and flagellar synthesis. J. Bacteriol. 193(10), 
2587–2597 (2011).

150  Mika F, Hengge R. Small RNAs in the control of RpoS, 
CsgD, and biofilm architecture of Escherichia coli. RNA 
Biol. 11(5), 494–507 (2014).

151  Chambers JR, Sauer K. Small RNAs and their role in biofilm 

formation. Trends Microbiol. 21(1), 39–49 (2013).

152  Dalton T, Dowd SE, Wolcott RD et al. An in vivo 

polymicrobial biofilm wound infection model to study 
interspecies interactions. PLoS One 6(11), e27317 (2011).

153  Hoffmann N, Rasmussen TB, Jensen PØ et al. Novel mouse 
model of chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection 
mimicking cystic fibrosis. Infect. Immun. 73(4), 2504–2514 
(2005).

154  Buret A, Ward KH, Olson ME, Costerton JW. An in vivo 
model to study the pathobiology of infectious biofilms on 
biomaterial surfaces. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 25(7), 865–874 
(1991).

155  Chauhan A, Lebeaux D, Decante B et al. A rat model of 

central venous catheter to study establishment of long-term 
bacterial biofilm and related acute and chronic infections. 
PLoS One 7(5), e37281 (2012).

156  Cole SJ, Records AR, Orr MW, Linden SB, Lee VT. 

Catheter-associated urinary tract infection by Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa is mediated by exopolysaccharide independent 
biofilms. Infect. Immun. 82(5), 2048–2058 (2014).

157  Watters C, DeLeon K, Trivedi U et al. Pseudomonas 

aeruginosa biofilms perturb wound resolution and antibiotic 
tolerance in diabetic mice. Med. Microbiol. Immunol. 202(2), 
131–141 (2013).

158  Bjarnsholt T, Jensen PØ, Fiandaca MJ et al. Pseudomonas 

aeruginosa biofilms in the respiratory tract of cystic fibrosis 
patients. Pediatr. Pulmonol. 44(6), 547–558 (2009).

512

Future Med. Chem. (2015) 7(4)

future science group