Bioﬁlm Development

TIM TOLKER-NIELSEN1
1Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, DK 2000 Copenhagen, Denmark

ABSTRACT During the past decade we have gained much
knowledge about the molecular mechanisms that are
involved in initiation and termination of bioﬁlm formation.
In many bacteria, these processes appear to occur in response
to speciﬁc environmental cues and result in, respectively,
induction or termination of bioﬁlm matrix production via the
second messenger molecule c-di-GMP. In between initiation
and termination of bioﬁlm formation we have deﬁned speciﬁc
bioﬁlm stages, but the currently available evidence suggests
that these transitions are mainly governed by adaptive
responses, and not by speciﬁc genetic programs.
It appears that bioﬁlm formation can occur through multiple
pathways and that the spatial structure of the bioﬁlms is
species dependent as well as dependent on environmental
conditions. Bacterial subpopulations, e.g., motile and
nonmotile subpopulations, can develop and interact during
bioﬁlm formation, and these interactions can aﬀect the
structure of the bioﬁlm. The available evidence suggests that
bioﬁlm formation is programmed in the sense that regulated
synthesis of extracellular matrix components is involved.
Furthermore, our current knowledge suggests that bioﬁlm
formation mainly is governed by adaptive responses of
individual bacteria, although group-level activities are
also involved.

INTRODUCTION

Experimental approaches primarily focused on genetic
and microscopic techniques have laid the foundation
for our current models of bacterial bioﬁlm formation.
This work has enabled researchers to deﬁne bioﬁlm
formation as a process that consists of speciﬁc stages.
The bioﬁlm developmental cycle is believed to include
(i) initial attachment of microbes to a surface or each
other, (ii) formation of microcolonies, (iii) maturation of
the bioﬁlm, and (iv) dispersal of the bioﬁlm (e.g., refer-
ence 1). The different bioﬁlm stages include bacterial
physiology and phenotypic responses suggestive of the

existence of a unique bioﬁlm biology which is not found
for planktonic bacteria.

The switch from the solitary planktonic bacterial
lifestyle to the communal bioﬁlm lifestyle involves a
change in the bacteria so that they initiate the production
of adhesins and extracellular matrix compounds which
interconnect them in the bioﬁlm. The extracellular bio-
ﬁlm matrix serves as a scaffold that has an essential cell-
to-cell connecting and structural function in bioﬁlms and
plays a role in a number of processes including cell at-
tachment, cell-to-cell
interactions, and antimicrobial
tolerance (2–7). The bioﬁlm matrix that is produced by
the bacteria contains mainly polysaccharides, proteins,
and extracellular DNA (8).

This article focuses on several issues of bioﬁlm for-
mation, including initiation of bioﬁlm formation, de-
velopment of bioﬁlm structure, formation of bioﬁlms
through multiple pathways, bacterial motility during
bioﬁlm formation, roles of quorum-sensing in bioﬁlm
formation, subpopulation development and interactions,
bioﬁlm formation governed by adaptive responses, and
termination of bioﬁlm formation in response to envi-
ronmental cues.

Received: 28 February 2014, Accepted: 12 August 2014,
Published: 27 March 2015
Editors: Mahmoud Ghannoum, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH; Matthew Parsek, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA; Marvin Whiteley, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX; and
Pranab Mukherjee, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
Citation: Tolker-Nielsen T. 2015. Biofilm development. Microbiol
Spectrum 3(2):MB-0001-2014. doi:10.1128/microbiolspec
.MB-0001-2014.
Correspondence: Tim Tolker-Nielsen, ttn@sund.ku.dk
© 2015 American Society for Microbiology. All rights reserved.

ASMscience.org/MicrobiolSpectrum

1

Downloaded from https://journals.asm.org/journal/spectrum on 23 February 2024 by 206.209.15.21.Tolker-Nielsen

BIOFILM FORMATION INITIATES
IN RESPONSE TO SPECIFIC
ENVIRONMENTAL CUES

Recent work in a number of bacterial species, including
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens,
Pseudomonas putida, Vibrio cholerae, Yersinia pestis,
Escherichia coli, Salmonella enterica, Burkholderia
cenocepacia, Bacillus subtilis, and Clostridium difﬁcile,
indicates that initiation of bioﬁlm formation occurs in
response to an increase in the level of the intracellular
second messenger c-di-GMP (9–24). Synthesis and deg-
radation of c-di-GMP in the bacteria is accomplished
by two distinct classes of proteins with opposing enzy-
matic activities (see reference 25 for a review). Digua-
nylate cyclases harboring GGDEF domains synthesize
c-di-GMP from two GTP molecules, whereas phos-
phodiesterases harboring EAL or HD-GYP domains
degrade c-di-GMP. Sensory domains are frequently as-
sociated with the GGDEF and EAL/HD-GYP domain
proteins, translating diverse environmental cues into
c-di-GMP levels. The bacteria usually produce several
different c-di-GMP diguanylate cyclases and phospho-
diesterases, and evidence is accruing that they work in
separate c-di-GMP circuits (26). Our current knowledge
suggests that a number of different environmental cues
and transducer mechanisms can lead to increases in local
pools of c-di-GMP, which in turn can activate the pro-
duction of adhesins and extracellular matrix products
(e.g., references 27, 28). For example, in P. aeruginosa
the WspA protein was found to be a membrane-bound
receptor that detects a signal associated with con-
tact to a surface (27, 29, 30). The signal is mediated to
the histidine kinase WspE, which catalyzes phospho-
transfer to the response regulator-diguanylate cyclase
WspR, which in turn produces c-di-GMP. Synthesis of
bioﬁlm matrix products such as the CdrA adhesin and
the Psl, Pel, and alginate exopolysaccharides in turn is
positively regulated by c-di-GMP in P. aeruginosa (18,
31).

In addition to c-di-GMP-mediated regulation, bioﬁlm
formation is also regulated via small regulatory RNAs
(sRNA) in many bacterial species (32). For example,
work with P. aeruginosa suggests that synthesis of the
exopolysaccharides Psl and Pel is induced in response
to environmental signals sensed by the sensor kinases
LadS and RetS and the sensor kinase/response regula-
tor pair GacS/GacA (33–38). Phosphorylation of GacA
by GacS is antagonized by the RetS sensor kinase and
stimulated by the LadS sensor kinase. After phosphor-
ylation of GacA by GacS, GacA induces transcription
of the RsmY and RsmZ sRNAs. The RsmY and RsmZ

sRNAs bind to and reduce the activity of the RsmA
protein, which otherwise inhibits expression of a num-
ber of genes, including those encoding Psl and Pel poly-
saccharide production. In addition, sensor kinases and
response regulators encoded by the bﬁSR, bfmSR, and
mifSR genes are evidently involved in the regula-
tion of P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation (39). Evidence
was provided that the BﬁSR system regulates bioﬁlm
formation by affecting synthesis of the CafA ribo-
nuclease, which controls the level of the RsmZ sRNA
(40). Moreover, the protein SagS was shown to con-
tribute to the motile-to-sessile switch and act in concert
with BﬁSR to initiate P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation
(41).

Moscoso et al.

(42) provided evidence that a
P. aeruginosa retS mutant contains increased levels
of c-di-GMP, indicating a link between sRNA-mediated
and c-di-GMP-mediated bioﬁlm regulation in P.
aeruginosa.

THE ARCHITECTURE AND ORGANIZATION
OF BIOFILMS ARE SPECIES DEPENDENT

Although microcolonies are the basic unit in most
bioﬁlms, the structure of the microcolonies can vary
greatly depending on the bioﬁlm-forming bacterial spe-
cies. For example, it has been demonstrated that under
identical conditions in a ﬂow chamber P. putida forms
loose protruding microcolonies (Fig. 1A), whereas
Pseudomonas knackmussii (formerly termed Pseudo-
monas sp. B13) forms spherical microcolonies (Fig. 1B)
(43). Moreover, when the two Pseudomonas species
were grown together in dual-species bioﬁlms,
they
still
formed their characteristic microcolony struc-
tures (Fig. 1C), apparently without affecting each other
(43). The architecture and organization of the three
different bioﬁlms are therefore dependent on the bioﬁlm-
forming bacterial species. Multiple factors are involved
in the formation of particular structures in bioﬁlms,
and currently the mechanisms underlying the differ-
ence in bioﬁlm structure displayed by P. putida and
P. knackmussii is not known. However, in the case
of P. putida, bioﬁlm formation in ﬂow chambers is
mainly governed by the large adhesive protein LapA
(9, 10, 44), whereas for other pseudomonads, such as
P. aeruginosa, bioﬁlm formation in ﬂow chambers is
mainly dependent on the exopolysaccharides Psl and
Pel (7, 45, 46). Differences between the extracellu-
lar matrix components that interconnect bacteria in
bioﬁlms may give rise to different structures of the
microcolonies.

2

ASMscience.org/MicrobiolSpectrum

Downloaded from https://journals.asm.org/journal/spectrum on 23 February 2024 by 206.209.15.21.Bioﬁlm Development

FIGURE 1 Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images showing spatial structures
in ﬂow-chamber-grown 5-day-old bioﬁlms formed by (A) Gfp-tagged (green ﬂuorescent)
P. putida, (B) Gfp-tagged P. knackmussii, and (C) a mixture of Gfp-tagged P. putida and
DsRed-tagged (red ﬂuorescent) P. knackmussii. Bars, 20 μm. Adapted from reference 43
with permission from the American Society for Microbiology. doi:10.1128/microbiolspec
.MB-0001-2014.f1

STRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT IN
BIOFILMS IS DEPENDENT ON
NUTRITIONAL CONDITIONS

As described above, different bacterial species may form
different bioﬁlm structures under identical conditions. In
addition, the same bacterial species may form different
bioﬁlm structures under different environmental con-
ditions. For example, Klausen et al. (47) demonstrated
that P. aeruginosa forms mushroom-shaped microcol-
onies when it grows in ﬂow chambers that are irrigated
with glucose medium, whereas it forms ﬂat bioﬁlms
when it grows in ﬂow chambers that are irrigated with
citrate medium (Fig. 2). Moreover, the structure of an
established bioﬁlm can change in response to a change
in nutritional conditions. Nielsen et al. (48) studied bio-
ﬁlm formation in ﬂow chambers of a mixture consist-
ing of P. knackmussii and Burkholderia xenovorans
(formerly termed Burkholderia sp. LB400). These bac-
teria have the potential to interact metabolically because
P. knackmussii can metabolize chlorobenzoate pro-
duced by B. xenovorans when grown on chlorobiphenyl.
When the dual-species bioﬁlm was fed with medium
containing chlorobiphenyl, mixed-species microcolonies
consisting of associated P. knackmussii and B. xeno-
vorans bacteria were formed. In contrast, when the
mixture was fed citrate, which can be metabolized by
both species, the two species formed separate micro-
colonies. After a shift in carbon source from a citrate
medium to a chlorobiphenyl medium, movement of the
P. knackmussii bacteria led to a change in the spatial

structure of the bioﬁlm from the separate microcolonies
toward the mixed-species microcolonies.

Similar observations were made by Wolfaardt et al.
(49), who studied a microbial mixture capable of de-
grading the herbicide diclofop. When this mixture was
grown in ﬂow chambers irrigated with diclofob, a highly
structured bioﬁlm with speciﬁc patterns of intergeneric
cellular coaggregation was formed. But when the mix-
ture was grown on tryptic soy broth (TSB), a bioﬁlm
lacking variation in thickness and structure was formed.
After a shift in carbon source from TSB to diclofob, it
took TSB-grown bioﬁlms only two days to acquire the
typical structure of diclofob-grown bioﬁlms. Although
the organisms and the nature of the metabolic inter-
actions in the study (49) were unknown, this study pro-
vided substantial evidence that structure development
in bioﬁlms is dependent on nutritional conditions and
that the structure of an established bioﬁlm can change in
response to a change in nutritional conditions.

BACTERIAL MOTILITY MAY BE
AN INTEGRATED PART OF
BIOFILM FORMATION

The studies described above suggest that bacterial mi-
gration is involved in the structural changes that can
occur in bioﬁlms in response to a change in nutritional
conditions. However, it appears that bacterial migra-
tion can be important for the structural development
of bioﬁlms also under stable environmental conditions.

ASMscience.org/MicrobiolSpectrum

3

Downloaded from https://journals.asm.org/journal/spectrum on 23 February 2024 by 206.209.15.21.Tolker-Nielsen

FIGURE 2 CLSM micrographs acquired in 5-day-old P. aeruginosa PAO1 bioﬁlms grown
on (A) glucose minimal medium and (B) citrate minimal medium. The central pictures
show-top down ﬂuorescence projections, and the ﬂanking pictures show vertical
sections. Bars, 20 μm. Adapted from reference 47 with permission from Wiley-Blackwell
publishing. doi:10.1128/microbiolspec.MB-0001-2014.f2

The available evidence suggests that P. aeruginosa forms
ﬂat bioﬁlm in ﬂow chambers irrigated with citrate me-
dium because the bacteria migrate extensively during the
initial phase of bioﬁlm formation and do not settle to
form microcolonies (47). P. aeruginosa pilA mutants
(deﬁcient in biogenesis of type IV pili) were shown to
form protruding microcolonies in ﬂow chambers irri-
gated with citrate medium, indicating that the motility
that occurs in citrate-grown P. aeruginosa wild type
bioﬁlms is driven by type IV pili (47). In ﬂow chambers
irrigated with glucose medium P. aeruginosa forms two
distinct subpopulations in the initial phase of bioﬁlm
formation: a nonmotile subpopulation that forms initial
microcolonies and a motile subpopulation that initially
migrates on the substratum (50). Formation of the
mushroom-shaped structures in the glucose-grown bio-
ﬁlms evidently involves colonization of the initial micro-
colonies by bacteria from the migrating subpopulation
that subsequently form mushroom caps on top of the
initial microcolonies, which then correspond to the stalk
of the mushroom-shaped structures (50). In glucose-
grown P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms containing a mixture of
Cfp-tagged pilA mutants and Yfp-tagged wild type bac-
teria, mushroom-shaped structures that contain pilA
mutants in the stalk and wild type in the cap are formed
(50) (Fig. 3). In addition, mushroom-shaped structures
that contain wild type bacteria in both the stalk and cap

can also be found (Fig. 3). These ﬁndings provide evi-
dence that bacterial migration may be an integrated part
of bioﬁlm formation.

BIOFILM FORMATION CAN OCCUR
THROUGH MULTIPLE PATHWAYS
As described above, the formation of bioﬁlm structures
is both species-speciﬁc and dependent on environmental
conditions, suggesting that bioﬁlm formation can occur
through multiple pathways. Under similar conditions
the mechanisms underlying bioﬁlm formation for closely
related species such as P. aeruginosa and P. putida may
be very different. As indicated above, the formation of
P. putida bioﬁlm in ﬂow chambers is mainly dependent
on the large adhesive surface protein LapA (9, 10, 44),
whereas the formation of P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm in ﬂow
chambers usually depends on exopolysaccharides such
as Psl and Pel (7, 45, 46). However, it is also conceiv-
able that a speciﬁc bacterial species may form bioﬁlm
through different pathways under different conditions.
P. aeruginosa, for example, can produce a number of
bioﬁlm matrix products, including the Psl, Pel, and al-
ginate polysaccharides; extracellular DNA; and the
type IV pili, Cup, CdrA, LecA, LecB, and Fap protein
components (2, 31, 45, 51–57). It may be expected that
some P. aeruginosa strains selected for under speciﬁc

4

ASMscience.org/MicrobiolSpectrum

Downloaded from https://journals.asm.org/journal/spectrum on 23 February 2024 by 206.209.15.21.Bioﬁlm Development

FIGURE 3 CLSM vertical sections acquired in a color-coded P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm grown
in a ﬂow chamber on glucose minimal medium. The CLSM micrographs were acquired in a
4-day-old bioﬁlm which was initiated with a 1:1 mixture of Yfp-tagged (yellow ﬂuorescent)
P. aeruginosa PAO1 wild type and Cfp-tagged (cyan ﬂuorescent) P. aeruginosa pilA
mutants. Bars, 20 μm. Adapted from reference 50 with permission from Wiley-Blackwell
publishing. doi:10.1128/microbiolspec.MB-0001-2014.f3

conditions will produce some of these bioﬁlm matrix
components in higher quantities than other strains and
that the bioﬁlm pathways will vary accordingly.

Whitchurch et al. (2) reported that the presence of
DNase in the medium prevented bioﬁlm formation by
the P. aeruginosa PAO1 laboratory strain in microtiter
trays and ﬂow chambers, suggesting that extracellular
DNA is an important matrix component in these bio-
ﬁlms. Addition of DNase to young ﬂow-chamber-grown
P. aeruginosa PAO1 bioﬁlms led to dispersal but did not
disperse mature bioﬁlms, probably due to production
of increasing amounts of other bioﬁlm matrix compo-
nents during bioﬁlm maturation. In contrast, Nemoto
et al. (58) found that mature bioﬁlms formed by four
independent clinical P. aeruginosa isolates could be dis-
persed by DNase treatment, suggesting that extracellular
DNA is the primary cell-to-cell interconnecting com-
pound in mature bioﬁlms formed by these P. aeruginosa
strains. In addition, Murakawa (59, 60) investigated
the chemical composition of the bioﬁlm matrix from
20 clinical P. aeruginosa isolates and found that the
bioﬁlm matrix from 18 strains consisted primarily of
DNA, while 2 strains with a mucoid phenotype pro-
duced slimes composed primarily of alginate.

Differences in bioﬁlm structure may give rise to dif-
ferent phenotypic responses, e.g., to antibiotic treat-
ment. Many types of bioﬁlms display a remarkable
increased tolerance to antimicrobial treatment com-
pared to planktonic bacteria (61). The mechanisms that
contribute to bioﬁlm-associated antimicrobial tolerance
include restricted antimicrobial diffusion, differential
induction of speciﬁc tolerance
physiological activity,
mechanisms, and persister cell formation (62). However,
similar phenotypic responses to antibiotic treatment

may have different underlying conditions even for bio-
ﬁlms formed by the same species and displaying simi-
lar structure. For example, tolerance to tobramycin in
P. aeruginosa PA14 bioﬁlms can be caused by peri-
plasmic glucans that bind tobramycin and prevent cell
death most likely by sequestering the antibiotic (63).
Synthesis of the periplasmic glucans requires the ndvB
gene in P. aeruginosa PA14, and bioﬁlms formed by a
P. aeruginosa ndvB mutant were found to be much
more sensitive to tobramycin than wild type bioﬁlms.
In contrast, the ndvB mutant and wild type showed
no difference in tobramycin sensitivity when grown in
planktonic culture. Reverse transcriptase PCR provided
evidence that the ndvB gene was expressed speciﬁcally
in P. aeruginosa PA14 bioﬁlms and not in planktonic
cells (63). However, microarray analysis has provided
evidence that ndvB is expressed at the same low level in
bioﬁlm and planktonic cells of P. aeruginosa PAO1 (64),
and therefore the ndvB-mediated mechanism appears
to be restricted to speciﬁc P. aeruginosa strains. How-
ever, P. aeruginosa PAO1 bioﬁlms also display tolerance
to tobramycin treatment, and in this case extracellular
DNA seems to be of primary importance because it
binds tobramycin and shields the antibiotic (65).

QUORUM-SENSING CAN PLAY IMPORTANT
ROLES IN BIOFILM FORMATION

In agreement with the fact that bacteria are closely as-
sociated in bioﬁlms, quorum-sensing has been shown to
play a role in bioﬁlm formation for various bacterial
species, e.g., P. aeruginosa and B. cenocepacia. Davies et
al. (66) showed that a quorum-sensing-defective mutant
strain of P. aeruginosa formed ﬂat and undifferentiated

ASMscience.org/MicrobiolSpectrum

5

Downloaded from https://journals.asm.org/journal/spectrum on 23 February 2024 by 206.209.15.21.Tolker-Nielsen

bioﬁlms in ﬂow-chambers under conditions where the
wild type strain formed bioﬁlms with large mushroom-
shaped structures. In addition, Hentzer et al. (67) dem-
onstrated that acylated homoserine lactone analogues,
which inhibit quorum-sensing, affected P. aeruginosa
bioﬁlm formation in ﬂow chambers. Subsequent studies
provided further evidence for the importance of quorum-
sensing signaling in the structural development of P. aeru-
ginosa bioﬁlms (e.g., references 4, 68). Quorum-sensing
plays a role in the generation of extracellular DNA in
P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms (69). In addition to a small amount
of extracellular DNA present in the initial phase in
P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms, release of a large amount of ex-
tracellular DNA occurs at a later stage of P. aeruginosa
bioﬁlm formation, regulated via the Pseudomonas quin-
olone signal (PQS)-based quorum-sensing system (69).
Evidence has been provided that the release of DNA in
P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm occurs as a consequence of lysis
of a small subpopulation of the bacteria (69). In agree-
ment with a role for PQS-based quorum-sensing in the
generation of extracellular DNA that functions as a bio-
ﬁlm matrix component, P. aeruginosa pqs mutants were
found to have defects in bioﬁlm formation, and the thin
bioﬁlms that were formed by the pqs mutants contained
little extracellular DNA (4, 68–70). The mechanism in-
volved in PQS-mediated DNA-release is unknown, but
evidence has been provided that PQS can act as a cell-
sensitizing pro-oxidant (71), which might cause lysis of a
the P. aeruginosa bacteria during
subpopulation of
bioﬁlm formation.

In addition to extracellular DNA, quorum-sensing
signaling controls the production of the biosurfactant
rhamnolipid, which was shown to be important for bio-
ﬁlm formation by P. aeruginosa (72–74). Furthermore,
the production of the P. aeruginosa LecA and LecB
lectins was shown to be regulated by quorum-sensing
(75), and the lectins were shown to play a role in P.
aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation (56, 57). Quorum-sensing
signaling in P. aeruginosa also controls the production
of siderophores such as pyoverdine and pyochelin,
which are also of importance for bioﬁlm formation (76).
Although quorum-sensing evidently controls the pro-
duction of many factors which are important for P. aeru-
ginosa bioﬁlm formation, the role of quorum-sensing
appears to be conditional, because quorum-sensing mu-
tant strains evidently form bioﬁlms indistinguishable
from wild type bioﬁlms under some conditions (77). A
more deﬁnitive requirement for quorum-sensing in bio-
ﬁlm formation seems to be the case for B. cenocepacia.
Inhülsen et al. (78) and Schmid et al. (79) identiﬁed three
main factors which potentially link quorum-sensing

signaling to B. cenocepacia bioﬁlm formation: type-1
ﬁmbriae, the BclACB lectins, and the large surface pro-
tein BapA. These factors are all under quorum-sensing
regulation in B. cenocepacia and were investigated in
detail for their roles in bioﬁlm formation. Deletion
of neither the type-1 ﬁmbriae genes nor the adjacent
chaperone-usher transport system genes affected bio-
ﬁlm formation by B. cenocepacia in microtiter trays or
ﬂow chambers, indicating that type-1 ﬁmbriae are not
essential for bioﬁlm formation by B. cenocepacia on
abiotic surfaces. Deletion of the bclACB operon did not
result in any signiﬁcant difference in bioﬁlm formation
in microtiter trays compared to the wild type strain.
In contrast, the deletion of bapA, as well as the adjacent
genes encoding a putative ABC transporter system re-
sponsible for the secretion of BapA, resulted in a sig-
niﬁcant reduction in bioﬁlm formation in microtiter
trays and ﬂow chambers. Downregulation of BapA ex-
pression through a rhamnose-inducible promoter in the
bclACB mutant resulted in a defect in bioﬁlm formation
compared to the corresponding wild type strain, with
reduced bapA expression, suggesting that lectins are
important in surface colonization when BapA is limiting
and that BapA is the major factor for bioﬁlm formation.
In addition to the ﬁmbriae, lectins, and BapA, quo-
rum-sensing also seems to regulate the production of
extracellular DNA in B. cenocepacia bioﬁlms. McCarthy
et al. (80) provided evidence that four-day-old B. ceno-
cepacia wild type bioﬁlms grown in ﬂow chambers
contained substantial amounts of extracellular DNA as a
part of the bioﬁlm matrix. In contrast, bioﬁlms formed
by a quorum-sensing-defective B. cenocepacia mutant
never passed the initial microcolony stage, and the thin
bioﬁlms showed little staining by propidium iodide, in-
dicating that extracellular DNA was not generated in
large quantities (80).

BACTERIAL SUBPOPULATIONS
DEVELOP AND INTERACT DURING
BIOFILM FORMATION

As described above, the different bacteria in mixed-
species bioﬁlms can engage in metabolic interactions,
and this affects bioﬁlm formation and the structure
of the bioﬁlm. However, it also appears that subpopu-
lations develop and interact in mono-species bioﬁlms
and that these interactions affect bioﬁlm formation and
the structure of the bioﬁlms. For example, the motile
and nonmotile subpopulations that can develop during
P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation appear to interact in a
number of ways. Yang et al. (4) provided evidence that

6

ASMscience.org/MicrobiolSpectrum

Downloaded from https://journals.asm.org/journal/spectrum on 23 February 2024 by 206.209.15.21.the PQS quorum-sensing system and genes necessary for
pyoverdine synthesis are expressed only in the stalk part
of the mushroom-shaped microcolonies that form in
glucose-grown P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms. PQS quorum-
sensing controls the production of extracellular DNA in
P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms (69), and evidence was provided
that release of extracellular DNA by the bacteria in the
initial microcolonies (which subsequently constitute the
stalk part of the mature mushroom-shaped microcol-
onies) is necessary for development of the mushroom-
shaped microcolonies (4). Furthermore, evidence was
presented that pyoverdine production in the initial mi-
crocolonies is necessary for iron uptake in the cap-
forming subpopulation and for development of the
mushroom-shaped microcolonies (4).

The propositions made by Yang et al. (4) were mainly
based on genetic evidence. Experiments involving P. aeru-
ginosa strains with pqsA::gfp and pvdA::gfp ﬂuorescent
reporters provided evidence that the genes required for
PQS quorum-sensing and pyoverdine synthesis were
expressed speciﬁcally in the stalk part of the mushroom-
shaped microcolonies in P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms. The three
mutant strains P. aeruginosa pilA, P. aeruginosa pvdA
(deﬁcient in pyoverdine production), and P. aeruginosa
pqsA (deﬁcient in PQS quorum-sensing) were shown to be
unable to form mushroom-shaped structures individually
in single-strain bioﬁlms. P. aeruginosa pilA mutants could
only form the initial microcolonies because type IV pili
are necessary for cap formation, and it appeared that
the P. aeruginosa pvdA and P. aeruginosa pqsA mutant
strains also had a defect in cap formation. However,
mushroom-shaped structures with pilA mutants in the
stalk and pqsA mutants in the cap were formed in pilA/
pqsA mixed-strain bioﬁlms. Likewise, mushroom-shaped
structures with pilA mutants in the stalk and pvdA
mutants in the cap were formed in pilA/pvdA mixed-
strain bioﬁlms. It appears that the pilA, pvdA, and pqsA
mutants cannot form mushroom-shaped microcolonies
individually in single-strain bioﬁlms, but in pilA/pqsA
mixed-strain bioﬁlms and pilA/pvdA mixed-strain bio-
ﬁlms the subpopulations interact with each other, and
together they form mushroom-shaped microcolonies.

BIOFILM FORMATION IS PROGRAMMED IN
THE SENSE THAT REGULATED SYNTHESIS
OF EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX COMPONENTS
IS INVOLVED, BUT IT IS ALSO GOVERNED BY
ADAPTIVE RESPONSES

Observations of the mushroom-shaped microcolonies
that can form in ﬂow-chamber-grown P. aeruginosa

Bioﬁlm Development

bioﬁlms have led to comparisons between P. aeruginosa
bioﬁlm microcolonies and the fruiting bodies that are
formed by Myxococcus bacteria (66), and it has led to
speculation about bioﬁlm formation as a highly pro-
grammed developmental process with hierarchically
ordered genetic pathways controlling attachment, micro-
colony formation, and microcolony maturation (81).
The developmental model
implies that the structure
of bioﬁlms has evolved to provide a speciﬁc function.
For example, it has been proposed that the ability of
P. aeruginosa to form mushroom-shaped microcolonies
in bioﬁlms has developed as a result of group-level
evolution, because these structures give efﬁcient nutrient
supply to the bacteria and efﬁcient removal of waste
products (82). However, the available evidence suggests
that the mushroom-shaped microcolonies are formed in
the ﬂow-chamber-grown P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms mainly
as a consequence of the special conditions in the ﬂow
chamber and the existence of motile and nonmotile
subpopulations. Because of bacterial nutrient consump-
tion, there is a decreasing nutrient gradient from the
top to the bottom of the bioﬁlm in the ﬂow chamber
(83). The motile bacteria that accumulate on the top of
the microcolonies therefore have a growth advantage in
comparison to the bacteria in the lower part of the bio-
ﬁlm and can proliferate to form the mushroom caps
(84). As described above, extracellular DNA released
by the nonmotile bacteria appears to be important
for settling of the motile bacteria in the cap portion of
the mushroom-shaped microcolonies (4). In addition,
exopolysaccharide production, rhamnolipid surfactant
production, quorum-sensing, and siderophores are also
known to be involved in formation of the mushroom-
shaped microcolonies (85). It is presently not understood
why the P. aeruginosa population differentiates into non-
motile and motile subpopulations in the initial stage of
bioﬁlm formation in glucose-fed ﬂow chambers and not
in citrate-fed ﬂow chambers.

If bioﬁlm formation is a highly programmed process,
it would be expected that a core set of “bioﬁlm genes”
would be expressed in all bioﬁlms of a given bacterium.
In the case of P. aeruginosa a number of microarray
analyses have been performed to monitor genes that
are expressed during bioﬁlm formation (e.g., 64, 86–88).
However, the transcriptomic analyses performed by
various research groups have failed to consistently
identify speciﬁc bioﬁlm regulons. The failure to detect
common themes in the gene expression proﬁle of
P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm cells suggests that bioﬁlm forma-
tion is mainly governed by adaptive responses. This is in
agreement with the fact that the structural development

ASMscience.org/MicrobiolSpectrum

7

Downloaded from https://journals.asm.org/journal/spectrum on 23 February 2024 by 206.209.15.21.Tolker-Nielsen

of P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms and different mixed-species
bioﬁlms is dependent on the nutritional conditions and
can change in response to changing nutritional condi-
tions, as described above. However, formation of bio-
ﬁlms does require expression of bioﬁlm matrix products.
In the case of P. aeruginosa these bioﬁlm matrix pro-
ducts include Psl, Pel, alginate, extracellular DNA, type
IV pili, Cup, CdrA, LecA, LecB, and Fap (2, 6, 31, 45,
52–57). The synthesis of many of these products is
positively regulated by the intracellular signaling mole-
cule c-di-GMP (e.g., see reference 25 for a review).
As mentioned previously, synthesis and degradation of
c-di-GMP in the bacteria is accomplished by diguanylate
cyclases and phosphodiesterases that contain sensory
domains, enabling translation of diverse environmental
cues into synthesis or degradation of c-di-GMP, which
binds to downstream effector molecules and modulates
their function, resulting in regulation of the production
of different adhesins and bioﬁlm matrix products. It
therefore appears that bioﬁlm formation is programmed
in the sense that regulated synthesis of extracellular
matrix components is involved. However, although re-
searchers have deﬁned a number of bioﬁlm stages, there
are currently no data that couple the initial c-di-GMP-
regulated matrix production to speciﬁc stages occurring
later during bioﬁlm formation. In addition, there is
currently no evidence that the different c-di-GMP sig-
naling circuits are hierarchically ordered to control tran-
sitions through speciﬁc stages in bioﬁlm formation.
Bioﬁlm-speciﬁc pathways may be limited to the initial
regulation of adhesin and matrix production, whereas
the successive stages of bioﬁlm formation may be gov-
erned by adaptive responses.

BIOFILM FORMATION IS LARGELY
GOVERNED BY ADAPTIVE RESPONSES OF
INDIVIDUAL BACTERIA, BUT GROUP-LEVEL
ACTIVITIES ARE ALSO INVOLVED
As mentioned above, bioﬁlm formation can be viewed as
a developmental process or as a process governed by
adaptive responses of individual bacteria. Bioﬁlm for-
mation as a developmental process involves bioﬁlm-
speciﬁc genes that are part of hierarchically ordered
pathways dedicated to controlling the transition through
speciﬁc bioﬁlm stages. Bioﬁlm formation governed by
adaptive responses involves the ability of the individual
bacteria to regulate cellular adhesiveness and motility
in response to micro-environmental cues. The develop-
mental and adaptive response hypotheses can be dis-
tinguished in evolutionary terms, because the former

The production of the cell-to-cell

involves selection of a given trait because of its beneﬁt
to the group, whereas the latter involves selection of
a given trait because of its beneﬁt to the individual
bacterium. The apparently cooperative traits in bio-
ﬁlms can in many cases alternatively be explained by
the ﬁtness advantages of this behavior for the individ-
ual bacterium. For example, the formation of regular
mushroom-shaped structures in P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms
via a pathway that involves type IV pili-dependent cel-
lular migration may be a coordinated social process that
creates bioﬁlms with architectures which allow optimal
circulation and nutrient supply to the population, or it
may, because nutrient gradients develop in bioﬁlms, be
the result of chemotaxis of individual bacteria moving
to a favorable nutrient-containing micro-environment.
interconnecting
components in bioﬁlms may be a cost each bacterium
pays to contribute to the social activity of creating a
protective bioﬁlm domicile, or it may simply increase the
adhesiveness of single bacterial cells, allowing them to
persist in the speciﬁc environment. Quorum-sensing-
dependent production of extracellular DNA and lectins
in P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms (69, 75), as well as quorum-
sensing-dependent production of surface protein, ﬁm-
briae, and lectins in B. cenocepacia bioﬁlms (78), may be
interpreted as group-level activities. However, instead of
a means to regulate production of speciﬁc factors at the
group level, quorum-sensing may be diffusion-sensing
that enables the individual bacterium to determine
whether secreted molecules rapidly move away from the
cell (89). Yet the observed involvement of quorum-
sensing in DNA release from a lysing subpopulation in
P. aeruginosa bioﬁlms, resulting in bioﬁlm stabilization,
may be interpreted as social behavior because the lysing
cells that provide the DNA obviously are not themselves
beneﬁted directly.

BIOFILM FORMATION TERMINATES
IN RESPONSE TO SPECIFIC
ENVIRONMENTAL CUES
In agreement with the suggestion that bioﬁlm formation
is mainly governed by adaptive responses, and does not
involve stable or meta-stable developmental changes, the
bacteria in bioﬁlms can at any stage sense environmental
cues and terminate bioﬁlm formation in response to
speciﬁc signals. In the case of P. putida, for example, it
was shown that established ﬂow-chamber-grown bio-
ﬁlms can disperse completely within a few minutes in
response to a shift from a medium with a carbon source
to a medium without a carbon source or in response to a

8

ASMscience.org/MicrobiolSpectrum

Downloaded from https://journals.asm.org/journal/spectrum on 23 February 2024 by 206.209.15.21.stoppage in the ﬂow of growth medium (10). Bioﬁlm
formation by P. putida in ﬂow chambers is mainly
governed by the large adhesive protein LapA (9, 44).
Evidence has been provided that c-di-GMP signaling
regulates bioﬁlm formation in P. putida by controlling
the presence of LapA on the cell surface (9). The pres-
ence of LapA on the cell surface is controlled by the
proteins LapD and LapG in response to the intracellular
level of c-di-GMP. The LapG protein is a periplasmic
proteinase, and it is able to cleave LapA off the cell
surface when it is not repressed. The LapD protein spans
the cytoplasmic membrane and contains degenerate
GGDEF and EAL domains which can bind c-di-GMP,
and it regulates the activity of the LapG proteinase by
repressing it when the intracellular level of c-di-GMP is
high and derepressing it when the intracellular level
of c-di-GMP is low. A c-di-GMP phosphodisterase gene
in P. putida, homologous to the P. aeruginosa bifA
gene, has recently been identiﬁed as being essential for
starvation-induced dispersal of P. putida bioﬁlms along
with the lapG gene, suggesting a link between P. putida
BifA phosphodisterase activity and LapG-mediated dis-
persal (90).

The work described above, together with structural
and biochemical work done in P. ﬂuorescens (91, 92),
suggests that P. putida can rapidly terminate bioﬁlm
formation in response to starvation through the follow-
ing mechanisms: (i) nutrient limitation leads to activation
of the BifA phosphodiesterase via an unknown pathway;
(ii) activation of the BifA phosphodiesterase leads to
a decrease in the c-di-GMP level in the vicinity of the
transmembrane LapD protein; (iii) the reduction in the
c-di-GMP level causes dissociation of c-di-GMP from the
LapD protein; (iv) dissociation of c-di-GMP from LapD
causes derepression of the periplasmic LapG protease;
(v) the derepressed LapG protease cleaves off the cell-
associated LapA protein; (v) cleavage of the LapA pro-
tein leads to the release of the cells from the bioﬁlm.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

During the past decade we have gained much knowledge
about the molecular mechanisms that are involved in
the initiation and termination of bioﬁlm formation.
In many bacteria, these processes appear to occur in
response to speciﬁc environmental cues and result in,
respectively, induction or termination of bioﬁlm matrix
production via the second messenger molecule c-di-
GMP. In between initiation and termination of bioﬁlm
formation we have deﬁned speciﬁc bioﬁlm stages, but
the currently available evidence suggests that these

Bioﬁlm Development

transitions are mainly governed by adaptive responses,
and not by speciﬁc genetic programs. It appears that
bioﬁlm formation can occur through multiple pathways
and that the spatial structure of the bioﬁlms is species
dependent as well as dependent on the environmental
conditions. Bacterial subpopulations, e.g., motile and
nonmotile subpopulations, can develop and interact
during bioﬁlm formation, and these interactions can
affect the structure of the bioﬁlm. The available evi-
dence suggests that bioﬁlm formation is programmed in
the sense that regulated synthesis of extracellular ma-
trix components is involved. Furthermore, our current
knowledge suggests that bioﬁlm formation is mainly
governed by adaptive responses of individual bacteria,
although group-level activities are also involved.

The realization that a number of separate c-di-GMP
signaling circuits regulate the production of different
bioﬁlm matrix components in bacteria in response to
speciﬁc environmental cues has been a major step for-
ward in bioﬁlm research. However, although we have
deﬁned a number of bioﬁlm stages, there is currently
no data that couple the initial c-di-GMP-regulated ma-
trix production to speciﬁc stages occurring later during
bioﬁlm formation, and there is currently no evidence
that the various c-di-GMP signaling circuits are hierar-
chically ordered to control the transition through spe-
ciﬁc stages in bioﬁlm formation. Future research will
show whether bioﬁlm-speciﬁc pathways are limited to
the initial and terminal c-di-GMP-mediated regulation
of adhesin and matrix production, with the in-between
stages of bioﬁlm formation governed by adaptive re-
sponses, or whether the different c-di-GMP signaling
circuits are hierarchically ordered to control the transi-
tion through speciﬁc stages in bioﬁlm formation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by grants from the Danish Council for
Independent Research and the Lundbeck foundation.

Conﬂicts of interest: I declare no conﬂicts.

REFERENCES
1. Sauer K, Camper AK, Ehrlich GD, Costerton JW, Davies DG. 2002.
Pseudomonas aeruginosa displays multiple phenotypes during develop-
ment as a bioﬁlm. J Bacteriol 184:1140–1154.
2. Whitchurch CB, Tolker-Nielsen T, Ragas PC, Mattick JS. 2002.
Extracellular DNA required for bacterial bioﬁlm formation. Science
295:1487.
3. Ma L, Jackson KD, Landry RM, Parsek MR, Wozniak DJ. 2006.
Analysis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa conditional psl variants reveals roles
for the psl polysaccharide in adhesion and maintaining bioﬁlm structure
postattachment. J Bacteriol 188:8213–8221.
4. Yang L, Nilsson M, Gjermansen M, Givskov M, Tolker-Nielsen T.
2009. Pyoverdine and PQS mediated subpopulation interactions involved
in Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation. Mol Microbiol 74:1380–
1392.

ASMscience.org/MicrobiolSpectrum

9

Downloaded from https://journals.asm.org/journal/spectrum on 23 February 2024 by 206.209.15.21.Tolker-Nielsen

5. Molin S, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2003. Gene transfer occurs with enhanced
efﬁciency in bioﬁlms and induces enhanced stabilisation of the bioﬁlm
structure. Curr Opin Biotechnol 14:255–261.
6. Friedman L, Kolter R. 2003. Genes involved in matrix formation in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 bioﬁlms. Mol Microbiol 51:675–690.
7. Jackson KD, Starkey M, Kremer S, Parsek MR, Wozniak DJ.
2004. Identiﬁcation of psl, a locus encoding a potential exopolysaccharide
that is essential for Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 bioﬁlm formation.
J Bacteriol 186:4466–4475.
8. Pamp SJ, Gjermansen M, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2007. The bioﬁlm matrix: a
sticky framework, p 37–69. In Kjelleberg S, Givskov M (ed), The Bioﬁlm
Mode of Life: Mechanisms and Adaptations. Horizon Bioscience,
Norfolk, UK.
9. Gjermansen M, Nilsson M, Yang L, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2010. Charac-
terization of starvation-induced dispersion in Pseudomonas putida
bioﬁlms: genetic elements and molecular mechanisms. Mol Microbiol
75:815–826.
10. Gjermansen M, Ragas P, Sternberg C, Molin S, Tolker-Nielsen T.
2005. Characterization of starvation-induced dispersion in Pseudomonas
putida bioﬁlms. Environ Microbiol 7:894–906.
11. Gjermansen M, Ragas P, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2006. Proteins with
GGDEF and EAL domains regulate Pseudomonas putida bioﬁlm forma-
tion and dispersal. FEMS Microbiol Lett 265:215–224.
12. Ryan RP, Lucey J, O’Donovan K, McCarthy Y, Yang L, Tolker-
Nielsen T, Dow JM. 2009. HD-GYP domain proteins regulate bioﬁlm
formation and virulence in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Environ Microbiol
11:1126–1136.
13. Simm R, Morr M, Kader A, Nimtz M, Romling U. 2004. GGDEF and
EAL domains inversely regulate cyclic di-GMP levels and transition from
sessility to motility. Mol Microbiol 53:1123–1134.
14. Ross P, Weinhouse H, Aloni Y, Michaeli D, Weinberger-Ohana P,
Mayer R, Braun S, de Vroom E, van der Marel GA, van Boom JH,
Benziman M. 1987. Regulation of cellulose synthesis in Acetobacter
xylinum by cyclic diguanylic acid. Nature 325:279–281.
15. Garcia B, Latasa C, Solano C, Garcia-del Portillo F, Gamazo C, Lasa I.
2004. Role of the GGDEF protein family in Salmonella cellulose biosyn-
thesis and bioﬁlm formation. Mol Microbiol 54:264–277.
16. Tischler AD, Camilli A. 2004. Cyclic diguanylate (c-di-GMP) regu-
lates Vibrio cholerae bioﬁlm formation. Mol Microbiol 53:857–869.
17. Kirillina O, Fetherston JD, Bobrov AG, Abney J, Perry RD. 2004.
HmsP, a putative phosphodiesterase, and HmsT, a putative diguanylate
cyclase, control Hms-dependent bioﬁlm formation in Yersinia pestis. Mol
Microbiol 54:75–88.
18. Hickman JW, Tifrea DF, Harwood CS. 2005. A chemosensory system
that regulates bioﬁlm formation through modulation of cyclic diguanylate
levels. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:14422–14427.
19. Kulasakara H, Lee V, Brencic A, Liberati N, Urbach J, Miyata S,
Lee DG, Neely AN, Hyodo M, Hayakawa Y, Ausubel FM, Lory S.
2006. Analysis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa diguanylate cyclases and
phosphodiesterases reveals a role for bis-(3′-5′)-cyclic-GMP in virulence.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:2839–2844.
20. Goymer P, Kahn SG, Malone JG, Gehrig SM, Spiers AJ, Rainey PB.
2006. Adaptive divergence in experimental populations of Pseudomonas
ﬂuorescens. II. Role of the GGDEF regulator WspR in evolution and de-
velopment of the wrinkly spreader phenotype. Genetics 173:515–526.
21. Lim B, Beyhan S, Meir J, Yildiz FH. 2006. Cyclic-diGMP signal
transduction systems in Vibrio cholerae: modulation of rugosity and
bioﬁlm formation. Mol Microbiol 60:331–348.
22. Fazli M, O’Connell A, Nilsson M, Niehaus K, Dow JM, Givskov M,
Ryan RP, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2011. The CRP/FNR family protein
Bcam1349 is a c-di-GMP effector that regulates bioﬁlm formation in the
respiratory pathogen Burkholderia cenocepacia. Mol Microbiol 82:327–
341.

23. Chen Y, Chai Y, Guo JH, Losick R. 2012. Evidence for cyclic
Di-GMP-mediated signaling in Bacillus subtilis. J Bacteriol 194:5080–
5090.
24. Purcell EB, McKee RW, McBride SM, Waters CM, Tamayo R. 2012.
Cyclic diguanylate inversely regulates motility and aggregation in Clos-
tridium difﬁcile. J Bacteriol 194:3307–3316.
25. Hengge R. 2009. Principles of c-di-GMP signalling in bacteria. Nat
Rev Microbiol 7:263–273.
26. Massie JP, Reynolds EL, Koestler BJ, Cong JP, Agostoni M, Waters
CM. 2012. Quantiﬁcation of high-speciﬁcity cyclic diguanylate signaling.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109:12746–12751.
27. O’Connor JR, Kuwada NJ, Huangyutitham V, Wiggins PA, Harwood
CS. 2012. Surface sensing and lateral subcellular localization of WspA, the
receptor in a chemosensory-like system leading to c-di-GMP production.
Mol Microbiol 86:720–729.
28. Monds RD, Newell PD, Gross RH, O’Toole GA. 2007. Phosphate-
dependent modulation of c-di-GMP levels
regulates Pseudomonas
ﬂuorescens Pf0-1 bioﬁlm formation by controlling secretion of the adhesin
LapA. Mol Microbiol 63:656–679.
29. Guvener ZT, Harwood CS. 2007. Subcellular location characteristics
of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa GGDEF protein, WspR, indicate that it
produces cyclic-di-GMP in response to growth on surfaces. Mol Microbiol
66:1459–1473.
30. Guvener ZT, Tifrea DF, Harwood CS. 2006. Two different Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa chemosensory signal transduction complexes localize to
cell poles and form and remould in stationary phase. Mol Microbiol
61:106–118.
31. Borlee BR, Goldman AD, Murakami K, Samudrala R, Wozniak DJ,
Parsek MR. 2010. Pseudomonas aeruginosa uses a cyclic-di-GMP-regu-
lated adhesin to reinforce the bioﬁlm extracellular matrix. Mol Microbiol
75:827–842.
32. Chambers JR, Sauer K. 2013. Small RNAs and their role in bioﬁlm
formation. Trends Microbiol 21:39–49.
33. Goodman AL, Kulasekara B, Rietsch A, Boyd D, Smith RS, Lory S.
2004. A signaling network reciprocally regulates genes associated with
acute infection and chronic persistence in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Dev
Cell 7:745–754.
34. Goodman AL, Merighi M, Hyodo M, Ventre I, Filloux A, Lory S.
2009. Direct interaction between sensor kinase proteins mediates acute
and chronic disease phenotypes in a bacterial pathogen. Genes Dev
23:249–259.
35. Ventre I, Goodman AL, Vallet-Gely I, Vasseur P, Soscia C, Molin S,
Bleves S, Lazdunski A, Lory S, Filloux A. 2006. Multiple sensors control
reciprocal expression of Pseudomonas aeruginosa regulatory RNA and
virulence genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:171–176.
36. Brencic A, Lory S. 2009. Determination of the regulon and identiﬁ-
cation of novel mRNA targets of Pseudomonas aeruginosa RsmA. Mol
Microbiol 72:612–632.
37. Brencic A, McFarland KA, McManus HR, Castang S, Mogno I, Dove
SL, Lory S. 2009. The GacS/GacA signal transduction system of Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa acts exclusively through its control over the tran-
scription of the RsmY and RsmZ regulatory small RNAs. Mol Microbiol
73:434–445.
38. Irie Y, Starkey M, Edwards AN, Wozniak DJ, Romeo T, Parsek MR.
2010. Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm matrix polysaccharide Psl is reg-
ulated transcriptionally by RpoS and post-transcriptionally by RsmA. Mol
Microbiol 78:158–172.
39. Petrova OE, Sauer K. 2009. A novel signaling network essential for
regulating Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm development. PLoS Pathog 5:
e1000668. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000668.

40. Petrova OE, Sauer K. 2010. The novel two-component regulatory
system BﬁSR regulates bioﬁlm development by controlling the small RNA
rsmZ through CafA. J Bacteriol 192:5275–5288.

10

ASMscience.org/MicrobiolSpectrum

Downloaded from https://journals.asm.org/journal/spectrum on 23 February 2024 by 206.209.15.21.41. Petrova OE, Sauer K. 2011. SagS contributes to the motile-sessile
switch and acts in concert with BﬁSR to enable Pseudomonas aeruginosa
bioﬁlm formation. J Bacteriol 193:6614–6628.
42. Moscoso JA, Mikkelsen H, Heeb S, Williams P, Filloux A. 2011.
The Pseudomonas aeruginosa sensor RetS switches type III and type VI
secretion via c-di-GMP signalling. Environ Microbiol 13:3128–3138.
43. Tolker-Nielsen T, Brinch UC, Ragas PC, Andersen JB, Jacobsen CS,
Molin S. 2000. Development and dynamics of Pseudomonas sp. bioﬁlms.
J Bacteriol 182:6482–6489.
44. Nilsson M, Chiang WC, Fazli M, Gjermansen M, Givskov M, Tolker-
Nielsen T. 2011. Inﬂuence of putative exopolysaccharide genes on Pseu-
domonas putida KT2440 bioﬁlm stability. Environ Microbiol 13:1357–
1369.
45. Matsukawa M, Greenberg EP. 2004. Putative exopolysaccharide
synthesis genes inﬂuence Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm development.
J Bacteriol 186:4449–4456.
46. Wozniak DJ, Wyckoff TJ, Starkey M, Keyser R, Azadi P, O’Toole GA,
Parsek MR. 2003. Alginate is not a signiﬁcant component of the extra-
cellular polysaccharide matrix of PA14 and PAO1 Pseudomonas
aeruginosa bioﬁlms. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:7907–7912.
47. Klausen M, Heydorn A, Ragas P, Lambertsen L, Aaes-Jorgensen A,
Molin S, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2003. Bioﬁlm formation by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa wild type, ﬂagella and type IV pili mutants. Mol Microbiol
48:1511–1524.
48. Nielsen AT, Tolker-Nielsen T, Barken KB, Molin S. 2000. Role of
commensal relationships on the spatial structure of a surface-attached
microbial consortium. Environ Microbiol 2:59–68.
49. Wolfaardt GM, Lawrence JR, Robarts RD, Caldwell SJ, Caldwell DE.
1994. Multicellular organization in a degradative bioﬁlm community.
Appl Environ Microbiol 60:434–446.
50. Klausen M, Aaes-Jorgensen A, Molin S, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2003. In-
volvement of bacterial migration in the development of complex multi-
cellular structures in Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlms. Mol Microbiol
50:61–68.
51. Friedman L, Kolter R. 2004. Two genetic loci produce distinct car-
bohydrate-rich structural components of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa
bioﬁlm matrix. J Bacteriol 186:4457–4465.
52. Hoiby N. 1974. Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in cystic ﬁbrosis.
Relationship between mucoid strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and the
humoral immune response. Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand B Microbiol
Immunol 82:551–558.
53. O’Toole GA, Kolter R. 1998. Flagellar and twitching motility are
necessary for Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm development. Mol
Microbiol 30:295–304.
54. Vallet I, Olson JW, Lory S, Lazdunski A, Filloux A. 2001. The
chaperone/usher pathways of Pseudomonas aeruginosa: identiﬁcation of
ﬁmbrial gene clusters (cup) and their involvement in bioﬁlm formation.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:6911–6916.
55. Dueholm MS, Sondergaard MT, Nilsson M, Christiansen G,
Stensballe A, Overgaard MT, Givskov M, Tolker-Nielsen T, Otzen DE,
Nielsen PH. 2013. Expression of Fap amyloids in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, P. ﬂuorescens, and P. putida results in aggregation and in-
creased bioﬁlm formation. Microbiologyopen 2:365–382.
56. Tielker D, Hacker S, Loris R, Strathmann M, Wingender J, Wilhelm S,
Rosenau F, Jaeger KE. 2005. Pseudomonas aeruginosa lectin LecB is lo-
cated in the outer membrane and is involved in bioﬁlm formation. Mi-
crobiology 151:1313–1323.
57. Diggle SP, Stacey RE, Dodd C, Camara M, Williams P, Winzer K.
2006. The galactophilic lectin, LecA, contributes to bioﬁlm development
in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Environ Microbiol 8:1095–1104.
58. Nemoto K, Hirota K, Murakami K, Taniguti K, Murata H, Viducic D,
Miyake Y. 2003. Effect of Varidase (streptodornase) on bioﬁlm formed by
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Chemotherapy 49:121–125.

Bioﬁlm Development

59. Murakawa T. 1973. Slime production by Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
IV. Chemical analysis of two varieties of slime produced by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Jpn J Microbiol 17:513–520.
60. Murakawa T. 1973. Slime production by Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
III. Puriﬁcation of slime and its physicochemical properties. Jpn J
Microbiol 17:273–281.
61. Costerton JW, Stewart PS, Greenberg EP. 1999. Bacterial bioﬁlms: a
common cause of persistent infections. Science 284:1318–1322.
62. Ciofu O, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2010. Antibiotic tolerance and resistance
in bioﬁlms, p 215–230. In Høiby N, Jensen PØ, Moser C (ed), Bioﬁlm
Infections. Springer, New York.
63. Mah TF, Pitts B, Pellock B, Walker GC, Stewart PS, O’Toole GA.
2003. A genetic basis for Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm antibiotic re-
sistance. Nature 426:306–310.
64. Hentzer M, Eberl L, Givskov M. 2005. Transcriptome analysis of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm development: anaerobic respiration and
iron limitation. Bioﬁlms 2:37–61.
65. Chiang WC, Nilsson M, Jensen PO, Hoiby N, Nielsen TE, Givskov
M, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2013. Extracellular DNA shields against amino-
glycosides in Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlms. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 57:2352–2361.
66. Davies DG, Parsek MR, Pearson JP, Iglewski BH, Costerton JW,
Greenberg EP. 1998. The involvement of cell-to-cell signals in the devel-
opment of a bacterial bioﬁlm. Science 280:295–298.
67. Hentzer M, Riedel K, Rasmussen TB, Heydorn A, Andersen JB,
Parsek MR, Rice SA, Eberl L, Molin S, Hoiby N, Kjelleberg S, Givskov M.
2002. Inhibition of quorum sensing in Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm
bacteria by a halogenated furanone compound. Microbiology 148:87–
102.
68. Yang L, Barken KB, Skindersoe ME, Christensen AB, Givskov M,
Tolker-Nielsen T. 2007. Effects of iron on DNA release and bioﬁlm de-
velopment by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Microbiology 153:1318–1328.
69. Allesen-Holm M, Barken KB, Yang L, Klausen M, Webb JS,
Kjelleberg S, Molin S, Givskov M, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2006. A character-
ization of DNA release in Pseudomonas aeruginosa cultures and bioﬁlms.
Mol Microbiol 59:1114–1128.
70. Diggle SP, Winzer K, Chhabra SR, Worrall KE, Camara M, Williams
P. 2003. The Pseudomonas aeruginosa quinolone signal molecule
overcomes the cell density-dependency of the quorum sensing hierarchy,
regulates rhl-dependent genes at the onset of stationary phase and can be
produced in the absence of LasR. Mol Microbiol 50:29–43.
71. Haussler S, Becker T. 2008. The pseudomonas quinolone signal (PQS)
balances life and death in Pseudomonas aeruginosa populations. PLoS
Pathog 4:e1000166. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000166.
72. Davey ME, Caiazza NC, O’Toole GA. 2003. Rhamnolipid surfactant
production affects bioﬁlm architecture in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1.
J Bacteriol 185:1027–1036.
73. Boles BR, Thoendel M, Singh PK. 2005. Rhamnolipids mediate de-
tachment of Pseudomonas aeruginosa from bioﬁlms. Mol Microbiol
57:1210–1223.
74. Pamp SJ, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2007. Multiple roles of biosurfactants in
structural bioﬁlm development by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J Bacteriol
189:2531–2539.
75. Winzer K, Falconer C, Garber NC, Diggle SP, Camara M, Williams P.
2000. The Pseudomonas aeruginosa lectins PA-IL and PA-IIL are con-
trolled by quorum sensing and by RpoS. J Bacteriol 182:6401–6411.
76. Banin E, Vasil ML, Greenberg EP. 2005. Iron and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:11076–11081.
77. Heydorn A, Ersboll B, Kato J, Hentzer M, Parsek MR, Tolker-Nielsen
T, Givskov M, Molin S. 2002. Statistical analysis of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa bioﬁlm development: impact of mutations in genes involved in
twitching motility, cell-to-cell signaling, and stationary-phase sigma factor
expression. Appl Environ Microbiol 68:2008–2017.

ASMscience.org/MicrobiolSpectrum

11

Downloaded from https://journals.asm.org/journal/spectrum on 23 February 2024 by 206.209.15.21.Tolker-Nielsen

78. Inhülsen S, Aguilar C, Schmid N, Suppiger A, Riedel K, Eberl L.
2012. Identiﬁcation of functions linking quorum sensing with bioﬁlm
formation in Burkholderia cenocepacia H111. Microbiologyopen 1:225–
242.
79. Schmid N, Pessi G, Deng Y, Aguilar C, Carlier AL, Grunau A, Omasits
U, Zhang LH, Ahrens CH, Eberl L. 2012. The AHL- and BDSF-dependent
quorum sensing systems control speciﬁc and overlapping sets of genes
in Burkholderia cenocepacia H111. PLoS One 7:e49966. doi:10.1371
/journal.pone.0049966.
80. McCarthy Y, Yang L, Twomey KB, Sass A, Tolker-Nielsen T,
Mahenthiralingam E, Dow JM, Ryan RP. 2010. A sensor kinase recog-
nizing the cell-cell signal BDSF (cis-2-dodecenoic acid) regulates virulence
in Burkholderia cenocepacia. Mol Microbiol 77:1220–1236.
81. O’Toole G, Kaplan HB, Kolter R. 2000. Bioﬁlm formation as mi-
crobial development. Annu Rev Microbiol 54:49–79.
82. Costerton JW, Lewandowski Z, Caldwell DE, Korber DR, Lappin-
Scott HM. 1995. Microbial bioﬁlms. Annu Rev Microbiol 49:711–
745.

83. Pamp SJ, Gjermansen M, Johansen HK, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2008.
Tolerance to the antimicrobial peptide colistin in Pseudomonas aeru-
ginosa bioﬁlms is linked to metabolically active cells, and depends on the
pmr and mexAB-oprM genes. Mol Microbiol 68:223–240.
84. Barken KB, Pamp SJ, Yang L, Gjermansen M, Bertrand JJ, Klausen M,
Givskov M, Whitchurch CB, Engel JN, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2008. Roles of
type IV pili, ﬂagellum-mediated motility and extracellular DNA in the
formation of mature multicellular structures in Pseudomonas aeruginosa
bioﬁlms. Environ Microbiol 10:2331–2343.

85. Harmsen M, Yang L, Pamp SJ, Tolker-Nielsen T. 2010. An update on
Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation, tolerance, and dispersal.
FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 59:253–268.
86. Whiteley M, Bangera MG, Bumgarner RE, Parsek MR, Teitzel GM,
Lory S, Greenberg EP. 2001. Gene expression in Pseudomonas aeruginosa
bioﬁlms. Nature 413:860–864.
87. Waite RD, Papakonstantinopoulou A, Littler E, Curtis MA. 2005.
Transcriptome analysis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa growth: comparison
of gene expression in planktonic cultures and developing and mature
bioﬁlms. J Bacteriol 187:6571–6576.
88. Folsom JP, Richards L, Pitts B, Roe F, Ehrlich GD, Parker A, Mazurie
A, Stewart PS. 2010. Physiology of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in bioﬁlms as
revealed by transcriptome analysis. BMC Microbiol 10:294.
89. Redﬁeld RJ. 2002. Is quorum sensing a side effect of diffusion sensing?
Trends Microbiol 10:365–370.
90. Lopez-Sanchez A, Jimenez-Fernandez A, Calero P, Gallego LD,
Govantes F. 2013. New methods for the isolation and characterization of
bioﬁlm-persistent mutants in Pseudomonas putida. Environ Microbiol
Rep 5:679–685.
91. Navarro MV, Newell PD, Krasteva PV, Chatterjee D, Madden DR,
O’Toole GA, Sondermann H. 2011. Structural basis for c-di-GMP-me-
diated inside-out signaling controlling periplasmic proteolysis. PLoS Biol
9:e1000588. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000588.
92. Newell PD, Boyd CD, Sondermann H, O’Toole GA. 2011. A c-di-
GMP effector system controls cell adhesion by inside-out signaling and
surface protein cleavage. PLoS Biol 9:e1000587. doi:10.1371/journal
.pbio.1000587.

12

ASMscience.org/MicrobiolSpectrum

Downloaded from https://journals.asm.org/journal/spectrum on 23 February 2024 by 206.209.15.21.