crossmark

MEETING REVIEW

Bioﬁlms 2015: Multidisciplinary Approaches Shed Light into Microbial
Life on Surfaces

Karen L. Visick,a Mark A. Schembri,b Fitnat Yildiz,c Jean-Marc Ghigod

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USAa; Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, School of Chemistry
and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australiab; Department of Microbiology and Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, California, USAc; Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique des Bioﬁlms, Département de Microbiologie, Paris, Franced

The 7th ASM Conference on Bioﬁlms was held in Chicago, Illinois, from 24 to 29 October 2015. The conference provided an in-
ternational forum for bioﬁlm researchers across academic and industry platforms, and from different scientiﬁc disciplines, to
present and discuss new ﬁndings and ideas. The meeting covered a wide range of topics, spanning environmental sciences, ap-
plied biology, evolution, ecology, physiology, and molecular biology of the bioﬁlm lifestyle. This report summarizes the presen-
tations with regard to emerging bioﬁlm-related themes.

The 7th American Society for Microbiology Conference on Bio-

ﬁlms was held in downtown Chicago, Illinois, from 24 to 29
October 2015. The meeting covered an exciting range of topics
across the scope of bioﬁlm research and comprised 4 keynote lec-
tures and 72 talks in 13 thematically organized sessions. The meet-
ing also included two extensive poster sessions that featured 304
posters. In this review, we attempt to convey the depth and
breadth of the topics that were presented during Bioﬁlms 2015
and to provide a synopsis of recent developments and emerging
trends in the ﬁeld.

Bioﬁlms are matrix-enclosed single or multispecies microbial
communities that can form on virtually any surface. Bioﬁlms form
in most natural or engineered systems, with both positive and
negative impacts. The composition and physical structure of bio-
ﬁlms reﬂect a multitude of complex interactions that take place at
different levels between the bioﬁlm constituents and their envi-
ronment; thus, the study of many intrinsic functions and attri-
butes of bioﬁlms now encompasses multiple research ﬁelds. The
ASM Bioﬁlms 2015 conference highlighted the need to employ
multidisciplinary approaches to advance fundamental and ap-
plied research on clinical, industrial, and environmental bioﬁlm
systems.

The conference was preceded by three parallel and highly at-
tended hands-on workshops on models and approaches to study,
image, and quantify bioﬁlms and bioﬁlm infections in vitro and in
vivo. For many, these workshops provided an excellent introduc-
tion to the 4-day conference, which comprised a comprehensive
and wide-ranging scientiﬁc program organized by a committee
composed of 10 international bioﬁlm experts. Overall, the pro-
gram was built around 13 thematic sessions, each comprising a
series of 25-min talks given by a mix of invited speakers and speak-
ers selected from authors of abstracts submitted to the scientiﬁc
committee.

BIOFILM COMMUNITIES IN NATURE
The conference was launched by the keynote lecture delivered by
Dianne Newmann (California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
CA), who gave an overview of the complex biological and physico-
chemical parameters that deﬁne different bioﬁlm lifestyles. Dr.
Newmann discussed the importance of using environmentally in-
formed reductionist approaches to study bioﬁlms, using examples

drawn from her work on bacterial growth and metabolism in the
microenvironment of cystic ﬁbrosis sputum. These studies re-
vealed that bacterial growth rates, on average, are far lower than
those typically studied in the laboratory (1). By performing a pro-
teomic study of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to determine which pro-
teins are actively being made under anaerobic survival conditions,
she described the discovery of a small, acidic protein, SutA (sur-
vival under transitions), that is posttranscriptionally upregulated
during slow growth. SutA associates with RNA polymerase and
regulates the expression of genes required for ribosome biogenesis
and others involved in bioﬁlm development, secondary metabo-
lite production, and ﬁtness under ﬂuctuating conditions (2). With
this insight underscoring the importance of studying bioﬁlm
properties beyond the lab, the ﬁrst session provided a basis for
understanding processes involving the formation of bioﬁlms and
the dynamics of different naturally occurring bioﬁlm communi-
ties. Matthew Powers (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
NC) explored the interactions between a mixed consortia of 29
bacteria isolated from roots of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana. His
work identiﬁed combinations of different species that exhibit both
cooperative and competitive interactions. Combined with matrix-
assisted laser desorption ionization–time of ﬂight (MALDI-TOF)
mass spectrometry (MS) to generate metabolic proﬁles of each of
these cultures, this approach was highlighted as a method that can
be used to better understand chemical signaling between mixed
species communities.

In a thought-provoking presentation, Roman Stocker (ETH,
Zurich, Switzerland) showed that coexistence of marine vibrios on
the surface of marine particles depends on a trade-off between the
opposing phenotypes of adhesion and dispersion in nutrient-vari-
able oceanic environments (Fig. 1). Under high-nutrient condi-

Accepted manuscript posted online 14 March 2016

Citation Visick KL, Schembri MA, Yildiz F, Ghigo J-M. 2016. Bioﬁlms 2015:
multidisciplinary approaches shed light into microbial life on surfaces. J Bacteriol
198:2553–2563. doi:10.1128/JB.00156-16.

Editor: G. A. O’Toole, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth

Address correspondence to Karen L. Visick, kvisick@luc.edu, or Jean-Marc Ghigo,
jean-marc.ghigo@pasteur.fr.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

October 2016 Volume 198 Number 19

Journal of Bacteriology

jb.asm.org 2553

Meeting Review

FIG 1 Bioﬁlm formation and cell dispersal on marine particles. The cartoon
depicts different strategies of marine bacteria for the utilization of marine
particles. Many bacteria in the ocean are motile and chemotactic (red and blue
cells), but only some populations can attach to and form bioﬁlms on marine
particles (red cells), whereas others hover in the vicinity of particles and obtain
fewer nutrients but in return can rapidly disperse to colonize new particles
(blue cells). (Courtesy of Yutaka Yawata, Glynn Gorick, and Roman Stocker;
reproduced with permission.)

tions, population specialization favoring attachment and growth
is promoted, while under limiting-nutrient conditions, there is a
switch to a dispersal mode of growth (3). Deborah Hogan (Dart-
mouth College, Hanover, NH) explored Candida albicans-P.
aeruginosa interactions in the context of cystic ﬁbrosis lung infec-
tion. Using a powerful machine learning approach (4) to explore
large-scale analysis of P. aeruginosa gene expression patterns, Dr.
Hogan described how ethanol production by C. albicans stimu-
lates cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) synthesis and the formation of P.
aeruginosa bioﬁlms, which in turn produce phenazines that en-
hance ethanol production. This positive-feedback loop provides
insight into why coinfection with both P. aeruginosa and C. albi-
cans is associated with poor outcomes in cystic ﬁbrosis (5). Mark
Mandel (Northwestern University, Chicago, IL) described how a
functional genomics approach led to the identiﬁcation of novel
positive and negative regulators of bioﬁlm development, includ-
ing chaperone protein DnaJ and the histidine kinase BinK, which
are required for robust in vivo colonization of the light organ of
Euprymna scolopes squid by Vibrio ﬁscheri bacteria (6). Stephen
Lindemann (Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, Richland,
WA) concluded this session dedicated to naturally occurring en-
vironmental bioﬁlms by presenting a study of nitrogen ﬂux into
phototrophic microbial mats, showing that nitrogen limitation is
species speciﬁc and that the spatial organization and partitioning
of carbon between autotrophs and heterotrophs in cyanobacterial
bioﬁlms depend upon the form of nitrogen species being assimi-
lated.

Together, these talks provided a deeper understanding of the
roles and activities of organisms within single-species and multi-
species bioﬁlms in the natural environment, as well as approaches
to effectively study bioﬁlms despite the complexity of the environ-
ments in which they are found.

BACTERIAL ADHESION FACTORS AND THE PLANKTONIC TO
BIOFILM LIFESTYLE SWITCH
Understanding how free-living planktonic bacteria switch to a ses-
sile mode of growth is still a topic of intense scrutiny and a tradi-
tional staple of all recent ASM bioﬁlm conferences. Two sessions
were dedicated to this topic, largely dominated by the question of
how regulation of adhesion factors and signaling networks involv-
ing c-di-GMP and other external signals contributes to this
switch.

In the ﬁrst session dedicated to the transition from planktonic
to bioﬁlm lifestyle, Clay Fuqua (Indiana University, Bloomington,
IN) described a novel signaling pathway controlling Agrobacte-
rium tumefaciens bioﬁlm formation involving small metabolites
called pterins, the ﬁrst report of their regulatory activity in bacte-
ria. He showed that pterin production by PruA controls surface
colonization through the dual-function diguanylate cyclase-phos-
phodiesterase protein DcpA. The resulting c-di-GMP modulation
regulates the production of a unipolar polysaccharide (UPP) ad-
hesin, which is required for A. tumefaciens attachment and bioﬁlm
formation (7).

Daniel Kearns (Indiana University, Bloomington, IN) pre-
sented data on a new surface contact-dependent cellular differen-
tiation mechanism in Bacillus subtilis, in which ﬂagellar density is
controlled by regulatory proteolysis of the master ﬂagellar activa-
tor protein SwrA, the master regulator of ﬂagellar biosynthesis, by
LonA. It was further shown that LonA-mediated degradation of
SwrA happens only in the presence of swarming motility inhibitor
A (SmiA). SwrA mutants that were resistant to proteolysis and
caused hyperswarming were identiﬁed; it was speculated that
these mutated residues were required for SmiA interaction (8).
Gerard Wong (UCLA, Los Angeles, CA) presented his collabora-
tion with George O’Toole with a surprising ﬁnding on surface
sensing in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14. By tracking the ﬁrst 20
generations of cells on a surface with single-cell resolution, they
showed that surface sensing is an inherently multigenerational
phenomenon: Pseudomonas uses the second messenger cyclic
AMP (cAMP) as a kind of accumulated memory to signal across
generations, such that mechano-sensing of the surface in one gen-
eration of cells can lead to ﬂagellum shutdown in cells many gen-
erations later (9).

A new aspect of control for the transition between planktonic
and bioﬁlm behaviors was presented by Benoît-Joseph Laventie
(Biozentrum, Basel, Switzerland), who described a new c-di-GMP
effector in P. aeruginosa, identiﬁed using capture-compound mass
spectrometry (10). This effector, FimA, mediates pilus-mediated
attachment and bioﬁlm formation. He showed that in response to
a surface, FimA rapidly localizes to the new cell pole in a cdG-
dependent manner to facilitate type IV pilus (T4P) assembly and
function.

Aretha Fiebig (University of Chicago, Chicago, IL) described
how ﬁne-tuning of the Caulobacter crescentus lifestyle depends on
the HﬁA protein inhibitor, which targets a conserved glycolipid
glycosyltransferase (GTF) required for holdfast synthesis. HﬁA is
regulated by a complex pathway involving kinases that act on the

2554 jb.asm.org

Journal of Bacteriology

October 2016 Volume 198 Number 19

response regulator LirA, possibly in combination with nutritional
sensing in different environments (11). Another mechanism in-
volved in the ﬁne-tuning of planktonic and bioﬁlm lifestyles was
presented by Alain Filloux (Imperial College London, London,
United Kingdom). The HptB pathway is part of the P. aeruginosa
GacA/Rsm lifestyle switch that controls bioﬁlm growth. Here it
was shown that the HptB control of bioﬁlm formation and motil-
ity can be rewired into an original c-di-GMP-dependent network
involving a newly identiﬁed diguanylate cyclase and effector pro-
tein.

In her talk, Sonja Albers (University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany) presented how she used genetic, proteomic, and tran-
scriptomic approaches to study regulation of bioﬁlm formation in
Archaea. She identiﬁed an archaeon-speciﬁc group of regulators,
the Lrs14 regulators, which are involved in major cell fate deci-
sions (12). In the crenarchaeon Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, the
Lrs14 regulator AbfR1 antagonistically coordinates motility and
extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) production during bio-
ﬁlm development. Future work will focus on understanding the
entire regulatory network involved in bioﬁlm formation in S. aci-
docaldarius. Christopher Jones (University of California, Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA) described the identiﬁcation of a new c-di-
GMP receptor, MshE, in Vibrio cholerae. MshE is a polymerizing
ATPase that is required for biosynthesis of MshA pili, which is
essential for transition from the motile to the sessile lifestyle.
MshE c-di-GMP binding activity is dependent on the MshE N-
terminal domain, and c-di-GMP affects MshA pilus assembly and
function through direct interactions with the MshE (13).

Maria Hadjifranjiskou (Vanderbilt University School of Med-
icine, Nashville, TN) described the application of MALDI-TOF
imaging mass spectrometry (IMS) to study uropathogenic Esche-
richia coli bioﬁlms. Dr. Hadjifranjiskou discussed how oxygen
concentration inﬂuences the expression of type 1 ﬁmbriae. She
showed that the phase-variable ﬁm promoter favored the “on’”
orientation in the presence of oxygen, while the “off” orientation
was favored under low-oxygen conditions. This illustrates how
sensing natural oxygen gradients within bioﬁlms shapes localiza-
tion of adhesive factors and contributes to the stratiﬁcation of
extracellular matrix components within the bioﬁlm (14). Using
atomic force microscopy (AFM), Cécile Formosa-Dague (Catho-
lic University of Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium) explored
the relationship between nanomechanics and adhesion and pre-
sented how multiparametric imaging combined with single-cell
force spectroscopy can unravel the zinc-dependent adhesive and
mechanical properties of the SasG adhesion protein from Staphy-
lococcus aureus. Dr. Formosa-Dague showed that zinc plays a dual
role in S. aureus SasG-mediated bioﬁlm formation: it alters the
surface properties of the cell to enable the projection of adhesive
SasG ﬁbrils beyond other surface components that can in turn
mediate speciﬁc cell-cell adhesion through the formation of Zn2(cid:2)-
dependent homophilic bonds between (cid:3)-sheet-rich SasG multi-
domains on neighboring cells (15). Finally, Inigo Lasa (Public
University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain) described the identiﬁca-
tion and characterization of a short amyloid stretch in the S. au-
reus Bap protein. When processed and released, Bap beta-amyloid
domains self-assemble into amyloid ﬁbrils and induce bacterial
aggregation in response to a decrease in pH during stationary-
phase growth. This amyloid behavior is inhibited in the presence
of calcium, which is thought to induce compaction, limiting ac-
cess to proteases that modulate its activity (59).

Meeting Review

Together, the speakers in this session presented an impressively
diverse array of approaches to explore the complex factors and
signals involved in surface sensing and early attachment events.

ASSEMBLY AND MODULATION OF THE BIOFILM MATRIX
The bioﬁlm matrix is the glue that holds the cells together. Diverse
organisms have evolved a wealth of different strategies for adher-
ing to each other and to surfaces, including the production of
amyloid ﬁbers, protein adhesins, and polysaccharides, as well as
mechanisms for modulating bioﬁlm matrix production or inter-
actions in response to environmental signals such as oxygen or
calcium.

For example, Matt Parsek (University of Washington, Seattle,
WA) presented new data on the composition of the PEL polysac-
charide, a component of the P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm matrix. Dr.
Parsek showed that PEL matrix polymer is a cationic exopolysac-
charide rich in N-acetylgalactosamine and N-acetylglucosamine.
PEL interacts with extracellular DNA via ionic interactions and
could provide a rigid yet extensible EPS shell that can accommo-
date bioﬁlm growth, like the envelope of an inﬂating balloon (16).
This contribution of the extracellular scaffold to the properties of
bioﬁlms was also illustrated by Nicola Stanley-Wall (University of
Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom). Dr. Stanley-Wall described
how BslA, a surface-active amphiphilic extracellular protein that
self-assembles and changes shape upon interaction with an inter-
face, forms a water-resistant hydrophobic coat around the Bacillus
subtilis bioﬁlm and contributes to shielding of the bacterial com-
munity by ﬁne-tuning its solvent and interfacial interactions (Fig.
2) (17).

Daniel Wozniak (Ohio State University, Columbus, OH) dis-
cussed the respective contributions of P. aeruginosa exopolysac-
charides involved in the mucoid (alginate) or small-colony variant
(SCV) morphotypes (PEL and PSL) to bioﬁlm biology. Dr.
Wozniak presented evidence for an SCV ﬁtness advantage via in-
creased tolerance to antimicrobial and host defenses due to c-di-
GMP-dependent aggregation, which then prevents uptake by
phagocytic cells and persistence in a porcine chronic wound in-
fection model.

Alexandra Paharik (University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA) dis-
cussed how, even in strains of Staphylococcus epidermidis unable to
produce surface polysaccharides, the secreted metalloprotease
SepA promotes bioﬁlm via proteolytic processing of a cell wall-
anchored adhesin called Aap (accumulation-associated protein).
Jin Hwan Park (Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea)
reported the characterization of the cabABC operon, which is es-
sential for bioﬁlm development in Vibrio vulniﬁcus. CabA is a
calcium-binding protein that is induced by elevated levels of c-di-
GMP and secreted in a CabBC-dependent manner. CabA is local-
ized to the bioﬁlm matrix, multimerizes in the presence of cal-
cium, and contributes to the V. vulniﬁcus robust bioﬁlm structure
and rugose colony phenotype (18).

Boo Shan Tseng (University of Washington, Seattle, WA; cur-
rently at UNLV, Las Vegas, NV) further illustrated that the bioﬁlm
matrix can be much more than a structural scaffold. Dr. Tseng
used a proteomic approach to investigate the role of bioﬁlm ma-
trix proteins and showed that ecotin, a serine protease inhibitor, is
selectively maintained by PSL in the P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm matrix.
Ecotin could protect bioﬁlms from proteolytic attack, potentially
inhibiting neutrophil elastase, an enzyme produced by the host
immune system during respiratory infections.

October 2016 Volume 198 Number 19

Journal of Bacteriology

jb.asm.org 2555

Meeting Review

FIG 2 Hydrophobic nature of wrinkled colonies of Bacillus subtilis. (A) Colony of B. subtilis with a red water droplet. (B) Cartoon depicting a cross-section of
the colony and the factors that inﬂuence formation of the wrinkles. (Republished from Molecular Biology [57].)

Fungal bioﬁlms, which are linked to many human infections,
were also represented in the meeting. The adherence of organisms
such as Candida albicans to implanted medical devices results in
bioﬁlms that withstand extraordinarily high antifungal concen-
trations. Thus, there is a strong need to understand the physiology
and molecular dynamics of fungal bioﬁlms. Aaron Mitchell (Car-
negie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA) introduced us to fungal
bioﬁlms formed by C. albicans. He described how Candida bioﬁlm
formation can result either from the positive regulation of glyco-
sylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-linked ALS1, ALS3, and HWP1
(through regulators such as Bcr1) or from the inhibition of yeast
formation via a negative regulatory cascade that leads to ﬁlamen-
tation and transition to the hyphal stage (19). David Andes (Uni-
versity of Wisconsin—Madison, Madison, WI) described how
Candida adherence to implanted medical devices can withstand
extraordinarily high antifungal concentrations. He showed that
the Candida bioﬁlm matrix contains mannan-glucan structures
that are distinct from Candida cell wall glucans and can sequester
antifungal drugs, therefore contributing to multidrug resistance
(19).

In his keynote address, Yves Brun (Indiana University, Bloom-
ington, IN) brought together the topics addressed by the ﬁrst four
sessions by discussing mechanisms of bacterial surface attachment
at the single-cell level (Fig. 3). Drawing from his work on Caulo-
bacter crescentus and other alphaproteobacteria producing hold-
fast adhesin structures, Dr. Brun discussed the notion of surface
sensing, the transition between reversible and irreversible attach-
ment, and the mechanical forces involved in holdfast-surface in-
teraction and in anchoring the holdfast to the cell envelope. These
results shed new light on holdfast biophysics and regulation and
revisited the role of ﬂagella in surface mechano-sensing, while also
providing inspiration for the development of new biologically in-
spired materials with different adhesion properties (20).

NEW INSIGHTS INTO ANTIMICROBIAL TOLERANCE AND
NOVEL TARGETS AND STRATEGIES TO FIGHT BIOFILM
INFECTIONS
The remarkable properties of resistance of bioﬁlms to antimicro-
bials and host defenses are well known and are likely one factor

contributing to the current crisis in the availability of effective
antibiotics in the clinic. Understanding the mechanisms that per-
mit bioﬁlm cells to resist or tolerate antibiotics and natural host
defenses and also understanding the corresponding response of
hosts to bioﬁlm infections are therefore important areas of inves-
tigation. Not surprisingly, the development of novel treatments
for infections, based on the properties of bioﬁlms, was a promi-
nent theme of the conference.

Recently, it has become apparent that the ability of a subset of
cells to become antibiotic-tolerant “persisters” is a key factor af-
fecting antibiotic effectiveness, and thus an active area of research
lies in understanding the mechanisms involved in the production
of persisters. Kim Lewis (Northeastern University, Boston, MA)
covered a decade of work on persister biology and bioﬁlm eradi-
cation, including a discussion on how a decrease in the level of

FIG 3 Automated image analysis of surface contact-stimulated holdfast syn-
thesis in C. crescentus. Phase-contrast images of cells arriving on a glass surface
and ﬂuorescence images of lectin staining of the holdfast were taken every 20
min and were analyzed with MicrobeJ (http://www.indiana.edu/(cid:4)microbej/)
(58, 65). MicrobeJ detects (green outline at t0) and tracks (pale blue) the cell
pole and the holdfast (green hexagon at th). User-deﬁned criteria automatically
record two temporal events, cell and holdfast detection, and these are used to
automatically compute the time delay between cell arrival on the surface and
holdfast synthesis.

2556 jb.asm.org

Journal of Bacteriology

October 2016 Volume 198 Number 19

ATP, but not toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems, leads to persistence in
S. aureus. Dr. Lewis then presented his recent work on the clinical
signiﬁcance of persister enrichment in clinical isolates and the
mechanistic basis of heritable, clinically relevant antibiotic toler-
ance (21). He concluded by presenting his recent work on the
discovery of the new antibiotic teixobactin, a cell wall synthesis
inhibitor with bactericidal activity against multiple pathogens, in-
cluding S. aureus and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Continuing the
theme of antibiotic tolerance, Olga Petrova (Binghamton Univer-
sity, Binghamton, NY) presented results suggesting that P. aerugi-
nosa bioﬁlm formation and bioﬁlm tolerance to antibiotics are
regulated by distinct signaling cascades, both involving the tran-
scriptional regulator FleQ and the sensor-regulator hybrid SagS,
but with discrete c-di-GMP requirements and protein interaction
partners. Separating the factors involved in bioﬁlm formation and
bioﬁlm tolerance will allow bioﬁlm control strategies by targeting
of the two distinct pathways (22).

Luanne Hall-Stoodley (The Ohio State University College of
Medicine, Columbus, OH) introduced us to Streptococcus pneu-
moniae bioﬁlms that colonize adenoid tissues and develop on
middle ear mucosal epithelia, contributing to the severity of respi-
ratory infections and chronic otitis. Dr. Hall-Stoodley showed
that low doses of nitric oxide affect metabolism and decrease an-
tibiotic tolerance. This suggests that adjunctive treatment with
low doses of NO, which do not trigger bioﬁlm dispersal, could
reduce antibiotic tolerance in pneumococcal bioﬁlms and im-
prove antibiotic efﬁcacy (60). Another treatment strategy was
championed by Bob Hancock (University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada), who made a strong case
for the use of broad-spectrum cationic antibioﬁlm peptides
against bioﬁlm infections. Dr. Hancock described the characteris-
tics of lead peptides optimized on exploratory robotized platforms
that target the intracellular stringent response signal ppGpp in
bioﬁlms. These peptides show synergy with existing antibiotics,
work in animal models, and represent promising alternatives to
combat resistant bioﬁlm infections (23). Lori Burrows (McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada) gave a thought-provok-
ing presentation that described a new approach to identify novel
antibiotic activities. Dr. Burrows reported the identiﬁcation of
several molecules (including thiostrepton) that stimulate P.
aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation at subinhibitory concentrations.
She used the bioﬁlm inducer phenotype, which likely induces de-
fense responses to sublethal damage, to screen for new antibiotics
and new targets in complex Streptomyces extracts (24).

Suzanne Walker (Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA) de-
scribed a synthetic lethal approach to map interactions between
cell envelope pathways in S. aureus and then used a synthetic lethal
chemical screen to identify inhibitors of proteins in an interaction
network. Network mapping involved screening a transposon mu-
tant library in the presence of a molecule that speciﬁcally targets a
step involved in envelope biosynthesis and using transposon se-
quencing (Tn-Seq) to identify the genes that become essential
when this step is inhibited. The synthetic lethal chemical screen
led to an inhibitor of DltB, which is involved in teichoic acid
D-alanylation. This approach, which can be generalized to other
bacteria, can be used to identify new small molecules that could
serve as novel drugs or as probes to elucidate biological functions
(25). In a continuation of this theme, Hans Steenackers (KU Leu-
ven, Leuven, Belgium) discussed the use of approaches based on
compound screening and synthetic chemistry to identify bioﬁlm

Meeting Review

inhibitors with broad spectrum activity. He elaborated on the mo-
lecular mode of action of 2-aminoimidazole-based bioﬁlm inhib-
itors, their low potential for resistance development, and their
application in antibioﬁlm coatings for orthopedic implants (26).
Targeting enzymes involved in production and degradation of
exopolysaccharides involved in matrix production may lead to
new bioﬁlm control strategies. Jennifer L. Dale (University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN) showed that the Enterococcus
faecalis glycosyltransferases (GTFs) EpaI and EpaOX are involved
in synthesis of a cell wall-associated Epa polysaccharide. A defect
in GTFs, and associated Epa synthesis, negatively impacts bioﬁlm
formation and leads to decreased structural integrity and suscep-
tibility to antibiotics and bile salts, suggesting that GTFs could be
new targets for antimicrobial design. Lynne Howell (Hospital for
Sick Children/University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada)
presented evidence that combinations of glycosyl hydrolases can
degrade matrix polysaccharides such as P. aeruginosa PEL or PSL
or fungal galactosaminogalactan. These enzymes could be used for
prevention or disruption of bioﬁlms in the treatment of chronic
microbial infections (61). Nicholas Jakubovics (Newcastle Uni-
versity, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom) presented work
demonstrating the effect of L-arginine on intermicrobial interac-
tions driving structure and stratiﬁcation, including coaggregation
and interspecies signaling, in dental bioﬁlms. Interfering with
these mechanisms could represent a novel approach to control
oral streptococcal bioﬁlms (27). John Gunn (The Ohio State Uni-
versity, Columbus, OH) showed how Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhi bioﬁlm formation on gallstones enhances gallbladder car-
riage. This was demonstrated in a human study and in a new
mouse model of carriage. In vitro and in vivo studies also demon-
strate involvement of the gallbladder epithelium in carriage. Po-
tential antigenic targets present in gallstone bioﬁlms or the use of
bioﬁlm-inhibiting compounds may provide potential new ave-
nues for therapeutic intervention against Salmonella bioﬁlm for-
mation and chronic gallbladder infection (28). Finally, using a
high-pressure liquid chromatography– high-resolution accurate
mass (HPLC-HRAM) MS untargeted lipidomic-based approach,
Skander Hathroubi (Université de Montréal, St-Hyacinthe, Que-
bec, Canada) discussed how planktonic and bioﬁlm Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae cells differed signiﬁcantly in lipid A structure
and quantity, with larger lipid A molecular entities observed in
bioﬁlm cells. This would explain at least in part the weaker ability
of A. pleuropneumoniae bioﬁlm cells to stimulate porcine alveolar
macrophages (PAMs) (62).

Targeting therapeutics to bacterial amyloids was another im-
portant topic that was covered. Fredrik Almqvist (Umea Univer-
sity, Umea, Sweden) discussed nonbiocidal approaches targeting
pilus ﬁbers and curli amyloids involved in bioﬁlm formation. Dr.
Almqvist described how the discovery and improvement of anti-
(cid:3)-amyloid lead compounds not only could inhibit bacterial
bioﬁlm formation but also may inform studies on human amy-
loid-related diseases (29). Cagla Tukel (Temple University, Phil-
adelphia, PA) showed surprising results suggesting that amyloid-
containing bioﬁlms trigger autoimmunity. At least 40% of
bacterial species produce amyloid-like proteins that share a qua-
ternary structure, as well as physical and immunological proper-
ties, with human amyloids associated with complex diseases such
as Alzheimer’s disease, prion diseases, and type II diabetes. Hence,
bacterial amyloids present in the bioﬁlm extracellular matrix,
where they can bind extracellular DNA (eDNA), could induce

October 2016 Volume 198 Number 19

Journal of Bacteriology

jb.asm.org 2557

Meeting Review

inﬂammation and production of anti-double-stranded DNA (an-
ti-dsDNA) as well as antichromatin antibodies, potentially con-
tributing to the progression of autoimmunity (30). In his work,
Steven Goodman (Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus,
OH) has found that targeting the DNABII family of proteins re-
quired for the maintenance of eDNA structure can prevent bio-
ﬁlm formation by nontypeable Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, P. aerugi-
nosa, S. aureus, and Burkholderia cenocepacia. Dr. Goodman
proposed that eDNA-DNABII could be essential for EPS integrity
in many bacteria and represents a universal target for bioﬁlm pre-
vention.

EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES AND BIOFILM APPLICATIONS
One of the highlights of the bioﬁlm meeting was the impressive
application of new and high-powered technologies to study bio-
ﬁlms and increase our understanding of different aspects of bio-
ﬁlm biology, including the role and/or identity of small molecules
such as oxygen, phenazines, and peptides, the spatial composition
of the matrix, and intercellular communication. Lars Dietrich
(Columbia University, New York, NY) showed that the wrinkly
colony phenotype of P. aeruginosa PA14 correlates with oxygen
limitation, regulation of matrix production by PAS domain-con-
taining proteins, and defects in the synthesis of endogenous re-
dox-active antibiotics called phenazines. Measurements of cellu-
lar NADH/NAD(cid:2) ratios in bioﬁlms support redox-driven
regulation of microbial community morphogenesis. His group’s
results implicate speciﬁc P. aeruginosa terminal oxidase com-
plexes in bioﬁlm physiology. Dr. Dietrich described his group’s
work developing miniaturized redox sensor chips that can be used
to map metabolite release by colony bioﬁlms. Mapping of
phenazines released from intact colonies revealed unexpected in-
ﬂuences of bioﬁlm position on phenazine production (31). Eliza-
beth Shank (University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC) de-
scribed her research using imaging mass spectrometry (IMS) and
ﬂuorescent reporter strains to identify metabolites from complex
soil communities that stimulate and repress bioﬁlm formation in
Bacillus subtilis. In particular, Dr. Shank described how thiocillin
(32) and 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (33) can impact matrix-pro-
ducing B. subtilis populations and therefore modulate different
microbial cellular phenotypes. Nydia Morales-Soto (University of
Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN) used confocal Raman microscopy
and secondary ion mass spectrometry imaging to ﬁngerprint
quinoline quorum-sensing (QS) molecules during swarming mo-
tility and bioﬁlm formation. This approach provided a spatiotem-
poral map of quorum-sensing-based bacterial communication,
revealing the importance of quorum-sensing signals in the early
stages of P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm development (34). Vanessa Phelan
(University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA) discussed how
to identify chemical communication signals in complex microbial
communities. Dr. Phelan showed how studying bacterial associa-
tion in S. aureus and E. coli cocultures revealed new competition
phenotypes against P. aeruginosa. A number of lead compounds
potentially involved in this growth inhibition were analyzed by
tandem mass spectrometry and the Global Natural Product Social
Molecular Networking (GNPS) platform, a collaborative crowd-
sourced knowledge base and analysis platform.

Lynette Cegelski (Stanford University, Stanford, CA) pre-
sented a quantitative approach to deﬁne the molecular composi-
tion of bacterial bioﬁlms using solid-state nuclear magnetic reso-
nance (NMR) in two different model systems, E. coli and V.

cholerae, revealing the power of this approach in determining dif-
ferences in matrix constituents (35). Florian Blauert (Karlsruher
Institute of Technology [KIT], Karlsruhe, Germany) discussed
how noninvasive optical coherence tomography (OCT) allows
fast, quantitative, and in situ three-dimensional (3D) analysis of
bioﬁlm deformation and how to access material properties of bio-
ﬁlms using OCT (36).

BIOFILMS IN ENGINEERED SYSTEMS
In engineered systems, bioﬁlm formation could be beneﬁcial, re-
sulting in optimally functioning engineered bioreactors and
bioremediation of toxic compounds, or detrimental, causing bio-
fouling and biocorrosion. Bruce Logan (Pennsylvania State Uni-
versity, University Park, PA) talked about hydrogen and biocata-
lyzed methane production from the cathode in bioﬁlm-based
bioelectrochemical systems. Dr. Logan discussed the functional
consequence of inactive or dead cells accumulating over time in
anode Geobacter anodireducens bioﬁlms. This accumulation re-
sults in a two-layer structure with a live outer layer, responsible for
current generation, covering an inactive inner core layer that
functions as an electrically conductive matrix (37). Howard Stone
(Princeton University, Princeton, NJ) showed how particular ﬂow
and surface structure inﬂuence bacterial bioﬁlm dynamics. In one
vignette, Dr. Stone documented how the interplay of ﬂow and
twitching motility of P. aeruginosa led to upstream migration of
the bacteria, which has consequences for how the bacteria spread
in ﬂow networks. Second, using experiments performed in a mi-
croﬂuidic device, he showed that S. aureus and P. aeruginosa form
ﬂow-induced, ﬁlamentous 3D bioﬁlm streamers that, over time,
bridge the spaces between obstacles. Interestingly, while the pres-
ence of surface-attached bioﬁlms exerts a limited impact on ﬂow
rates, streamers cause rapid clogging. This suggests that the for-
mation of bioﬁlm streamers, rather that surface bioﬁlms, may be
the primary cause of ﬂow reduction in environmental, industrial,
and medical systems. In a ﬁnal vignette, Dr. Stone indicated ways
in which ﬂow interacts with quorum sensing (QS) to produce
space and time dependence of the QS response (38). Allon Hoch-
baum (University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA) presented ap-
proaches to engineer structure-property relationships in E. coli
and P. aeruginosa coculture bioﬁlms through the systematic vari-
ation of microfabricated growth substrate topography. Dr. Hoch-
baum showed that periodically patterned microstructures of
growth substrate induce morphological changes in E. coli bioﬁlms
and a differential accumulation of indole, thus altering competi-
tion dynamics between E. coli and P. aeruginosa. An application of
this technology was presented by Ethan Mann (Sharklet Technol-
ogies, Inc., Aurora, CO), who discussed how surface characteris-
tics impact biological responses and presented the Sharklet micro-
topography, a nonbiocidal antibioﬁlm surface for medical devices
(39). Kuang He (ExxonMobil, Annandale, NJ) presented a study
on the role of indole signaling in anaerobic bioﬁlm formation
using the model sulfate-reducing bacterium Desulfovibrio vulgaris
(He et al., submitted). Danielle France (NIST, Boulder, CO) pre-
sented data on the anticorrosive inﬂuence of Acetobacter aceti bio-
ﬁlms on carbon steel surfaces, suggesting that corrosion inhibition
by an acid-producing bacterium could be used as an inexpensive
solution to industrial problems. Caitlin Howell (Harvard Univer-
sity, Cambridge, MA; currently at the University of Maine, Orono,
ME) presented an overview on the use of immobilized liquid lay-
ers as a nontoxic method of controlling biomolecular and micro-

2558 jb.asm.org

Journal of Bacteriology

October 2016 Volume 198 Number 19

bial attachment on a wide variety of different substrates. Dr. How-
ell discussed numerous potential applications of the technology,
inspired by the slippery surface of the carnivorous pitcher plant,
including the prevention of bacterial bioﬁlm adhesion to cathe-
ters, the mitigation of stable algal bioﬁlm formation on glass sub-
strates, and the reduction of thrombosis in vivo (40).

These presentations collectively showed that better under-
standing of bioﬁlm formation in industrial settings will allow im-
proved utilization and control of bioﬁlms.

EVOLUTION IN BIOFILMS AND THE IMPACT OF THE
ENVIRONMENT ON BACTERIAL LIFESTYLES
Jintao Liu (University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA) dis-
cussed cooperation and competition in B. subtilis bioﬁlms: cells at
the bioﬁlm periphery protect cells at the bioﬁlm interior from
external attack but also starve them through nutrient consump-
tion. Dr. Liu and colleagues showed that this conﬂict was resolved
by the emergence of long-range metabolic codependence between
the two groups of cells. Consequently, the bioﬁlm periphery
halted growth periodically, increasing availability of nutrients to
the sheltered interior cells and promoting the resilience of bio-
ﬁlms against external attack (41). From the same laboratory, on a
related topic, Gurol Suel (University of California, San Diego, San
Diego, CA) reported that bacterial potassium ion channels con-
duct long-range electrical signals within bacterial bioﬁlm commu-
nities via spatially propagated waves of depolarization. This coor-
dinates metabolic states among cells in the interior and periphery
of the bioﬁlm. The report of a community function for potassium
ion channels demonstrates the existence of long-range electrical
signaling in bioﬁlms (42). Vaughn Cooper (University of Pitts-
burgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA) shed some light on the
evolution of wrinkly small-colony variants during Burkholderia
cenocepacia chronic infection. By following the evolution of wrin-
kly colonies from a smooth B. cenocepacia ancestor, a phenome-
non associated with bioﬁlm infections, Dr. Cooper showed that
selection favored mutations clustered in the wsp operon (43). De-
spite phenotypic differences among wrinkly mutants, they shared
similar ﬁtness properties in mixed bioﬁlms and acted as early sur-
face colonists, suggesting that strong selective forces drive the col-
onization of this common niche (44). Daniel López (Institute for
Molecular Infectious Biology, Würzburg, Germany) described the
evolution of antibiotic resistance in Staphylococcus bioﬁlms using
intraclonal competition. In the presence of magnesium, the pa-
rental strain gave rise sequentially to two physiologically distinct
subpopulations, a nonpigmented, quorum-sensing overproducer
that overproduces the antibiotic bacteriocin and represses bio-
ﬁlms but spreads better due to increased levels of surfactants, and
a pigmented strain with increased resistance to vancomycin due to
a thicker cell wall. Evolution of the strains in vivo also occurred in
organs with higher magnesium levels and resulted in increased
virulence (45).

Joe Harrison (University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada)
described the identiﬁcation of a potentially widespread trans-
poson that encodes a thermosensing diguanylate cyclase, TdcA,
which confers thermal control of P. aeruginosa bioﬁlm formation
by mediating temperature-dependent changes by the production
of c-di-GMP at higher temperatures (37°C) but not at lower tem-
peratures (25°C). TdcA is conserved in other organisms, indicat-
ing that temperature-controlled production of c-di-GMP may
represent an evolutionary advantage. Ákos Kovács (University of

Meeting Review

Jena, Jena, Germany) discussed how B. subtilis populations pro-
ducing costly matrix components as common goods can avoid
being out-competed by cheaters in spatially structured environ-
ments of colony bioﬁlms (46). Interestingly, cheaters are also ex-
cluded from pellicles at the air-liquid interface, but they regain
their bioﬁlm incorporation ability after prolonged repeated coc-
ultivation in the presence of the producer population. This illus-
trates how general adaption to certain growth conditions can
beneﬁt a cheater population at the expense of the cooperator pop-
ulation rather than by speciﬁc adjustment. Kasper Kragh (Univer-
sity of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark) showed that the rel-
ative ﬁtness of aggregates depends markedly on the density of
surrounding single cells. When competition between aggregates
and single cells is low, the aggregate is at a growth disadvantage
because of reduced nutrient availability in the aggregate interior.
However, when there are many single cells on the surface and
competition is high, extending vertically above the surface gives
the top of the aggregate a better access to nutrients. These ﬁndings
suggest that aggregates and their interaction with single cells may
play a previously unrecognized role during bioﬁlm initiation and
development.

George O’Toole (Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth Col-
lege, Hanover, NH) delivered the third keynote lecture. Dr.
O’Toole discussed the topic of diguanylate cyclases and in partic-
ular why so many diguanylate cyclases are required for P. ﬂuore-
scens bioﬁlm formation. He made a compelling case that the in-
vestment of a cell to switch to a bioﬁlm lifestyle requires the
existence of multistep regulation checkpoints to control the early
events associated with surface interaction. Work by Kurt Dahl-
strom, a graduate student in the lab, showed that one mechanism
of control for c-di-GMP signaling is via protein-protein interac-
tions (47). Current studies, using Biolog to explore 192 different
conditions for each of 53 different c-di-GMP-related mutants,
together with bacterial two-hybrid assays, are beginning to ex-
plore the broader c-di-GMP network in this microbe.

SOCIAL AND ASOCIAL INTERACTIONS IN BIOFILMS
The Bioﬁlms 2015 conference presentations also reﬂected an in-
creasing focus on multispecies bioﬁlms and microbe-microbe in-
teractions. Numerous studies were directed at understanding the
competition and cooperation that occur between organisms of the
same or different species in the context of a shared environment.
Joseph Mougous (University of Washington, Seattle, WA) de-
scribed a new cytoplasmic type VI secretion effector, Tse6, which
slows growth of target cells by degrading the universally essential
dinucleotides NAD(cid:2) and NADP(cid:2). Entry of Tse6 into target cells
requires its binding to an essential housekeeping protein, the
translation elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu). Understanding these
bacterial cell-cell interactions will provide insights into interac-
tions that may be occurring within bioﬁlms (48). Peggy Cotter
(University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC) dis-
cussed the mechanism of interbacterial signal transduction medi-
ated by contact-dependent growth inhibition (CDI) system pro-
teins. Dr. Cotter described how the Burkholderia thailandensis
BcpA protein not only inhibits the growth of “nonself” bacteria by
mediating CDI (interbacterial killing) but also contributes to
community behaviors in “self” bacteria (those producing the same
BcpAIOB proteins) by inducing changes in the expression of genes
required for the production of pili and EPS and for bioﬁlm for-
mation (63). These results suggest that CDI system proteins con-

October 2016 Volume 198 Number 19

Journal of Bacteriology

jb.asm.org 2559

Meeting Review

FIG 4 Confocal micrograph of a skin abscess coinfected with A. actinomyce-
temcomitans (red) and S. gordonii (green). Shown is a confocal micrograph of
a 3-day-old murine skin abscess coinfected with the oral cavity pathogen Ag-
gregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (red) and the oral cavity commensal
Streptococcus gordonii (green). Spatial analysis of abscesses revealed that A.
actinomycetemcomitans and S. gordonii persist in vivo as bioﬁlm-like aggregates
that are about 0.5 pl in volume and that A. actinomycetemcomitans maintains a
(cid:5)4-(cid:6)m distance away from S. gordonii. Mutation of the enzyme dispersin B in
A. actinomycetemcomitans, which degrades and allows it to disperse from bio-
ﬁlms, disrupts the ability of A. actinomycetemcomitans to achieve its optimal
spacing from S. gordonii and as a result mitigates its virulence in the abscess.
Scale bar, 25 (cid:6)m. (Courtesy of Jake Everett and Kendra Rumbaugh, Texas
Tech University Health Sciences Center; reproduced with permission.)

trol both cooperative and competitive behaviors to build micro-
bial communities composed of only closely related bacteria (49).
Marvin Whiteley (University of Texas, Austin, TX) discussed
the importance of spatial organization and the use of methods to
reproduce the structural bioﬁlm integrity in laboratory settings.
Using S. aureus-P. aeruginosa and Aggregatibacter actinomycetem-
comitans-Streptococcus gordonii
interactions as examples, Dr.
Whiteley showed that there is an optimal distance at which cells
can grow adjacent to each other in an infection site (50). This
underlines the importance of spatial positioning in polymicrobial
infections and suggests that targeting biogeography and spatial
location could constitute a valid therapeutic strategy (Fig. 4) (51).
John Kirby (University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA) similarly dis-
cussed spatial aspects of bacterium-bacterium interactions in his
work investigating predator-prey dynamics within a bioﬁlm. Dr.
Kirby described how unknown metabolites, including myxoprin-
comide produced by Myxococcus xanthus, induce the formation of
novel megastructures by B. subtilis that are raised above the sur-
face and ﬁlled with viable endospores embedded within a dense
matrix. Genetically distinguishable from colony bioﬁlm forma-
tion, megastructures provide a mechanism for survival of B. sub-
tilis against predation, permitting them to escape into dormancy
via sporulation. Bacillus subtilis also produces the metabolite
bacillaene to fend off predatory M. xanthus. Antibiotic production

at the interface between layers of M. xanthus and B. subtilis spores
may result in a “standoff” between the two organisms (52).

Interactions between more than two partners were also ex-
plored. Mette Burmølle (University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark) presented her work on interactions within a mixed
bioﬁlm comprising four bacterial soil isolates. Dr. Burmølle ob-
served that all four strains beneﬁtted from joining the multispecies
bioﬁlm, which is strongly indicative of cooperative forces that
shape multispecies bioﬁlm communities (53). Staffan Kjelleberg
(SCELSE, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, and
Centre for Marine BioInnovation, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia) discussed how de-
ﬁned, simple multispecies bioﬁlms as well as highly species-rich
wastewater bioﬁlm granules can be experimentally designed to
explore bioﬁlm community traits and ecological theories (54). Dr.
Kjelleberg described how increased species richness replaces in-
traspeciﬁc variants to offer community rather than population
stress protection and how quorum-sensing signaling is a true
community trait with signal production and quenching assigned
to phylogenetically different organisms. These approaches suggest
that complex microbial bioﬁlms can be designed to understand
bioﬁlm biology also at the community level, reﬂecting natural
bioﬁlm systems (55).

The host environment provides additional factors that may
inﬂuence microbial interactions. Catherine R. Armbruster (Uni-
versity of Washington, Seattle, WA) showed that the S. aureus
extracellular virulence factor SpA plays a previously undescribed
role in polymicrobial interactions within bioﬁlms. SpA inﬂuences
the course of P. aeruginosa infection by binding type IV pili and
the exopolysaccharide Psl, leading to inhibition of not only bio-
ﬁlm formation but also phagocytosis by neutrophils. Because S.
aureus frequently precedes P. aeruginosa in chronic infections, Dr.
Armbruster proposed that SpA can impact P. aeruginosa persis-
tence and host interactions during coinfection (64). These results
provide an indication of the complex and potentially unexpected
interactions that occur in polymicrobial infections via secreted
extracellular virulence factors with multiple functions. Katharina
Ribbeck (MIT, Cambridge, MA) discussed the role of mucins,
gel-forming components secreted by goblet cells, in interactions
between different microbes. Dr. Ribbeck described how mucin
can reduce bacterial adhesion by blocking attachment, promoting
dispersion, or affecting interspecies communication and suppres-
sion of virulence factors (56).

CONCLUSIONS
The bioﬁlm ﬁeld is rapidly growing, and the 7th ASM bioﬁlm
conference provided a platform for researchers from different sci-
entiﬁc disciplines to discuss and exchange ideas in all aspects of
bioﬁlm research, including fundamentals of bioﬁlm formation
and bioﬁlm control and encompassing bioﬁlms in medicine, in
the natural environment, and in industry. In search of answers to
fundamental scientiﬁc questions regarding the molecular under-
pinnings of surface attachment, production and composition of
the bioﬁlm matrix, physiological consequences of bioﬁlm forma-
tion, and regulation of bioﬁlm formation, bioﬁlm researchers are
using interdisciplinary approaches leading to unprecedented mo-
lecular detail. For example, the use of electrochemical camera
chips or MALDI-TOF imaging mass spectrometry for simultane-
ous imaging of multiple metabolites in bioﬁlms is leading to a
better understanding of the biochemical processes that occur dur-

2560 jb.asm.org

Journal of Bacteriology

October 2016 Volume 198 Number 19

ing bioﬁlm development and in bioﬁlms formed in the natural
environment. Application of noninvasive imaging methods in liv-
ing bioﬁlms at high spatial and temporal resolution combined
with big data analysis is revealing fundamental principles of bio-
ﬁlm formation. It was exciting to see translational work capitaliz-
ing on the advancement of our understanding of bioﬁlm forma-
tion. The increasing focus on translational work was revealed
through a plethora of examples, including the use of antibodies
and engineered enzymes to target bioﬁlm matrix components,
novel biomaterials engineered to prevent adherence of bioﬁlm
bacteria, and compounds designed to target major structures and
regulatory circuits to control bioﬁlm formation. Finally, the im-
portance of understanding mechanisms of multispecies bioﬁlm
formation, the diversity and functions of microbes in the commu-
nity in which they live, and the necessity for the development of
techniques to answer these questions were highlighted. The objec-
tives of this meeting were to bring together scientists from across
the world to present and discuss the best and most up-to-date
research on bioﬁlms, to better understand and control bioﬁlms,
and to foster interdisciplinary collaborations.

During the closing remarks, Jean-Marc Ghigo announced that
the next and 8th edition of the ASM bioﬁlm conference would be
held in 2018 and encouraged bioﬁlm lovers to disperse and recruit
new talent to the bioﬁlm ﬁeld.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Fitnat Yildiz (chair) and Jean-Marc Ghigo (cochair) gratefully acknowl-
edge Paul Stoodley, Thomas Bjarnsholt, Claus Moser, Darla Goeres, Alex
Rickhardt, and all their colleagues for their dedication and involvement in
the organization of the workshops. They also thank the conference pro-
gram committee members Clay Fuqua, Tom Battin, Susanne Haussler,
George O’Toole, Phil Stewart, Mark Schembri, and Pradeep Singh for
their contributions.

We thank the following sponsors for their support of the 7th ASM
Conference on Bioﬁlms: Burroughs Welcome Fund (Platinum support-
er); Bioﬁlm Control, Bitplane, Center for Bioﬁlm Engineering at MSU,
EMD Millipore, Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, Recombina,
Thorlabs, and Vertex Pharmaceuticals (Gold supporters); Leica Microsys-
tems and Sharklet Technologies (Silver supporters); and Biosurface Tech-
nologies and Cook Medical (Bronze supporters).

REFERENCES
1. Kopf SH, Sessions AL, Cowley ES, Reyes C, Van Sambeek L, Hu Y,
Orphan VJ, Kato R, Newman DK. 2016. Trace incorporation of heavy
water reveals slow and heterogeneous pathogen growth rates in cystic
ﬁbrosis sputum. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113:E110 –E116. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1073/pnas.1512057112.

2. Babin BM, Bergkessel M, Sweredoski MJ, Moradian A, Hess S, Newman
DK, Tirrell DA. 2016. SutA is a bacterial transcription factor expressed
during slow growth in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
113:E597–E605. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1514412113.

3. Yawata Y, Cordero OX, Menolascina F, Hehemann JH, Polz MF, Stocker
R. 2014. Competition-dispersal tradeoff ecologically differentiates recently
speciated marine bacterioplankton populations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
111:5622–5627. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1318943111.

4. Tan J, Hammond JH, Hogan DA, Greene CS. 2016. ADAGE-based inte-
gration of publicly available Pseudomonas aeruginosa gene expression data
with denoising autoencoders illuminates microbe-host interactions. mSys-
tems 1(1):e00025-15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/mSystems.00025-15.

5. Chen AI, Dolben EF, Okegbe C, Harty CE, Golub Y, Thao S, Ha DG,
Willger SD, O’Toole GA, Harwood CS, Dietrich LE, Hogan DA. 2014.
Candida albicans ethanol stimulates Pseudomonas aeruginosa WspR-
controlled bioﬁlm formation as part of a cyclic relationship involving
phenazines. PLoS Pathog 10:e1004480. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal
.ppat.1004480.

Meeting Review

6. Brooks JF, II, Gyllborg MC, Cronin DC, Quillin SJ, Mallama CA, Foxall
R, Whistler C, Goodman AL, Mandel MJ. 2014. Global discovery of
colonization determinants in the squid symbiont Vibrio ﬁscheri. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:17284 –17289. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.1415957111.

7. Feirer N, Xu J, Allen KD, Koestler BJ, Bruger EL, Waters CM, White
RH, Fuqua C. 2015. A pterin-dependent signaling pathway regulates a
dual-function diguanylate cyclase-phosphodiesterase controlling surface
attachment in Agrobacterium tumefaciens. mBio 6:e00156. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1128/mBio.00156-15.

8. Mukherjee S, Bree AC, Liu J, Patrick JE, Chien P, Kearns DB. 2015.
Adaptor-mediated Lon proteolysis restricts Bacillus subtilis hyperﬂagella-
tion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112:250 –255. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073
/pnas.1417419112.

9. Luo Y, Zhao K, Baker AE, Kuchma SL, Coggan KA, Wolfgang MC,
Wong GC, O’Toole GA. 2015. A hierarchical cascade of second messen-
gers regulates Pseudomonas aeruginosa surface behaviors. mBio
6:e02456-14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/mBio.02456-14.

10. Laventie BJ, Nesper J, Ahrne E, Glatter T, Schmidt A, Jenal U. 2015.
Capture compound mass spectrometry—a powerful tool to identify novel
c-di-GMP effector proteins. J Vis Exp http://dx.doi.org/10.3791/51404.
11. Fiebig A, Herrou J, Fumeaux C, Radhakrishnan SK, Viollier PH,
Crosson S. 2014. A cell cycle and nutritional checkpoint controlling bac-
terial surface adhesion. PLoS Genet 10:e1004101. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1371/journal.pgen.1004101.

12. Orell A, Peeters E, Vassen V, Jachlewski S, Schalles S, Siebers B, Albers
SV. 2013. Lrs14 transcriptional regulators inﬂuence bioﬁlm formation
and cell motility of Crenarchaea. ISME J 7:1886 –1898. http://dx.doi.org
/10.1038/ismej.2013.68.

13. Jones CJ, Utada A, Davis KR, Thongsomboon W, Zamorano Sanchez
D, Banakar V, Cegelski L, Wong GC, Yildiz FH. 2015. C-di-GMP
regulates motile to sessile transition by modulating MshA pili biogenesis
and near-surface motility behavior in Vibrio cholerae. PLoS Pathog 11:
e1005068. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1005068.

14. Floyd KA, Moore JL, Eberly AR, Good JA, Shaffer CL, Zaver H,
Almqvist F, Skaar EP, Caprioli RM, Hadjifrangiskou M. 2015. Adhesive
ﬁber stratiﬁcation in uropathogenic Escherichia coli bioﬁlms unveils
oxygen-mediated control of type 1 pili. PLoS Pathog 11:e1004697. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1004697.

15. Formosa-Dague C, Speziale P, Foster TJ, Geoghegan JA, Dufrene YF.
2016. Zinc-dependent mechanical properties of Staphylococcus aureus
bioﬁlm-forming surface protein SasG. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113:410 –
415. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1519265113.

16. Jennings LK, Storek KM, Ledvina HE, Coulon C, Marmont LS, Sadovs-
kaya I, Secor PR, Tseng BS, Scian M, Filloux A, Wozniak DJ, Howell
PL, Parsek MR. 2015. Pel is a cationic exopolysaccharide that cross-links
extracellular DNA in the Pseudomonas aeruginosa bioﬁlm matrix. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 112:11353–11358. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.1503058112.

17. Bromley KM, Morris RJ, Hobley L, Brandani G, Gillespie RM, McClus-
key M, Zachariae U, Marenduzzo D, Stanley-Wall NR, MacPhee CE.
2015. Interfacial self-assembly of a bacterial hydrophobin. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 112:5419 –5424. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1419016112.
18. Park JH, Jo Y, Jang SY, Kwon H, Irie Y, Parsek MR, Kim MH, Choi SH.
2015. The cabABC operon essential for bioﬁlm and rugose colony devel-
opment in Vibrio vulniﬁcus. PLoS Pathog 11:e1005192. http://dx.doi.org
/10.1371/journal.ppat.1005192.

19. Desai JV, Mitchell AP. 2015. Candida albicans bioﬁlm development and its
genetic control. Microbiol Spectr 3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/microbiolspec
.MB-0005-2014.

20. Li G, Brown PJ, Tang JX, Xu J, Quardokus EM, Fuqua C, Brun YV.
2012. Surface contact stimulates the just-in-time deployment of bacterial
adhesins. Mol Microbiol 83:41–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958
.2011.07909.x.

21. Schumacher MA, Balani P, Min J, Chinnam NB, Hansen S, Vulic M,
Lewis K, Brennan RG. 2015. HipBA-promoter structures reveal the basis
of heritable multidrug tolerance. Nature 524:59 – 64. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1038/nature14662.

22. Gupta K, Liao J, Petrova OE, Cherny KE, Sauer K. 2014. Elevated levels
of the second messenger c-di-GMP contribute to antimicrobial resistance
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Mol Microbiol 92:488 –506. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1111/mmi.12587.

23. de la Fuente-Nunez C, Reffuveille F, Mansour SC, Reckseidler-Zenteno

October 2016 Volume 198 Number 19

Journal of Bacteriology

jb.asm.org 2561

Meeting Review

SL, Hernandez D, Brackman G, Coenye T, Hancock RE. 2015. D-
enantiomeric peptides that eradicate wild-type and multidrug-resistant
bioﬁlms and protect against lethal Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections.
Chem Biol 22:196 –205. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2015.01
.002.

24. Nguyen UT, Harvey H, Hogan AJ, Afonso AC, Wright GD, Burrows LL.
2014. Role of PBPD1 in stimulation of Listeria monocytogenes bioﬁlm
formation by subminimal inhibitory beta-lactam concentrations. Antimi-
crob Agents Chemother 58:6508 – 6517. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/AAC
.03671-14.

25. Pasquina L, Santa Maria JP, Jr, McKay Wood B, Moussa SH, Matano
LM, Santiago M, Martin SE, Lee W, Meredith TC, Walker S. 2016. A
synthetic lethal approach for compound and target identiﬁcation in
Staphylococcus aureus. Nat Chem Biol 12:40 – 45. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1038/nchembio.1967.

26. Steenackers H, Ermolat’ev D, Trang TT, Savalia B, Sharma UK, De
Weerdt A, Shah A, Vanderleyden J, Van der Eycken EV. 2014. Micro-
wave-assisted one-pot synthesis and anti-bioﬁlm activity of 2-amino-1H-
imidazole/triazole conjugates. Org Biomol Chem 12:3671–3678. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1039/c3ob42282h.

27. Kolderman E, Bettampadi D, Samarian D, Dowd SE, Foxman B,
Jakubovics NS, Rickard AH. 2015. L-arginine destabilizes oral multi-
species bioﬁlm communities developed in human saliva. PLoS One 10:
e0121835. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0121835.

28. Gonzalez-Escobedo G, Marshall JM, Gunn JS. 2011. Chronic and
acute infection of the gall bladder by Salmonella Typhi: understanding
the carrier state. Nat Rev Microbiol 9:9 –14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038
/nrmicro2490.

29. Andersson EK, Bengtsson C, Evans ML, Chorell E, Sellstedt M, Lind-
gren AE, Hufnagel DA, Bhattacharya M, Tessier PM, Wittung-
Stafshede P, Almqvist F, Chapman MR. 2013. Modulation of curli
assembly and pellicle bioﬁlm formation by chemical and protein chaper-
ones. Chem Biol 20:1245–1254. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol
.2013.07.017.

30. Gallo PM, Rapsinski GJ, Wilson RP, Oppong GO, Sriram U, Goulian
M, Buttaro B, Caricchio R, Gallucci S, Tukel C. 2015. Amyloid-DNA
composites of bacterial bioﬁlms stimulate autoimmunity. Immunity 42:
1171–1184. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2015.06.002.

31. Bellin DL, Sakhtah H, Zhang Y, Price-Whelan A, Dietrich LE, Shepard
KL. 2016. Electrochemical camera chip for simultaneous imaging of mul-
tiple metabolites in bioﬁlms. Nat Commun 7:10535. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1038/ncomms10535.

32. Bleich R, Watrous JD, Dorrestein PC, Bowers AA, Shank EA. 2015.
Thiopeptide antibiotics stimulate bioﬁlm formation in Bacillus subtilis.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112:3086 –3091. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas
.1414272112.

33. Powers MJ, Sanabria-Valentin E, Bowers AA, Shank EA. 2015. Inhibi-
tion of cell differentiation in Bacillus subtilis by Pseudomonas protegens.
J Bacteriol 197:2129 –2138. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JB.02535-14.
34. Baig NF, Dunham SJ, Morales-Soto N, Shrout JD, Sweedler JV, Bohn
PW. 2015. Multimodal chemical imaging of molecular messengers in
emerging Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacterial communities. Analyst 140:
6544 – 6552. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C5AN01149C.

35. Cegelski L. 2015. Bottom-up and top-down solid-state NMR approaches
for bacterial bioﬁlm matrix composition. J Magn Reson 253:91–97. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmr.2015.01.014.

36. Blauert F, Horn H, Wagner M. 2015. Time-resolved bioﬁlm deformation
measurements using optical coherence tomography. Biotechnol Bioeng
112:1893–1905. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bit.25590.

37. Sun D, Cheng S, Wang A, Li F, Logan BE, Cen K. 2015. Temporal-
spatial changes in viabilities and electrochemical properties of anode bio-
ﬁlms. Environ Sci Technol 49:5227–5235. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs
.est.5b00175.

38. Persat A, Nadell CD, Kim MK, Ingremeau F, Siryaporn A, Drescher K,
Wingreen NS, Bassler BL, Gitai Z, Stone HA. 2015. The mechanical
world of bacteria. Cell 161:988 –997. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015
.05.005.

39. May RM, Magin CM, Mann EE, Drinker MC, Fraser JC, Siedlecki CA,
Brennan AB, Reddy ST. 2015. An engineered micropattern to reduce
bacterial colonization, platelet adhesion and ﬁbrin sheath formation for
improved biocompatibility of central venous catheters. Clin Transl Med
4:9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40169-015-0050-9.

40. Howell C, Vu TL, Lin JJ, Kolle S, Juthani N, Watson E, Weaver JC,

Alvarenga J, Aizenberg J. 2014. Self-replenishing vascularized fouling-
release surfaces. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 6:13299 –13307. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1021/am503150y.

41. Liu J, Prindle A, Humphries J, Gabalda-Sagarra M, Asally M, Lee DY,
Ly S, Garcia-Ojalvo J, Suel GM. 2015. Metabolic co-dependence gives
rise to collective oscillations within bioﬁlms. Nature 523:550 –554. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature14660.

42. Prindle A, Liu J, Asally M, Ly S, Garcia-Ojalvo J, Suel GM. 2015. Ion
channels enable electrical communication in bacterial communities. Na-
ture 527:59 – 63. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature15709.

43. O’Rourke D, FitzGerald CE, Traverse CC, Cooper VS. 2015. There and
back again: consequences of bioﬁlm specialization under selection for
dispersal. Front Genet 6:18. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2015.00018.
44. Ellis CN, Traverse CC, Mayo-Smith L, Buskirk SW, Cooper VS. 2015.
Character displacement and the evolution of niche complementarity in a
model bioﬁlm community. Evolution 69:283–293. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1111/evo.12581.

45. Koch G, Yepes A, Forstner KU, Wermser C, Stengel ST, Modamio J,
Ohlsen K, Foster KR, Lopez D. 2014. Evolution of resistance to a last-
resort antibiotic in Staphylococcus aureus via bacterial competition. Cell
158:1060 –1071. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.06.046.

46. van Gestel J, Weissing FJ, Kuipers OP, Kovacs AT. 2014. Density of
founder cells affects spatial pattern formation and cooperation in Bacillus
subtilis bioﬁlms. ISME J 8:2069 –2079. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ismej
.2014.52.

47. Dahlstrom KM, Giglio KM, Collins AJ, Sondermann H, O’Toole GA.
2015. Contribution of physical interactions to signaling speciﬁcity be-
tween a diguanylate cyclase and its effector. mBio 6:e01978-15. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1128/mBio.01978-15.

48. Whitney JC, Quentin D, Sawai S, LeRoux M, Harding BN, Ledvina HE,
Tran BQ, Robinson H, Goo YA, Goodlett DR, Raunser S, Mougous JD.
2015. An interbacterial NAD(P)((cid:2)) glycohydrolase toxin requires elon-
gation factor Tu for delivery to target cells. Cell 163:607– 619. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.027.

49. Anderson MS, Garcia EC, Cotter PA. 2014. Kind discrimination and
competitive exclusion mediated by contact-dependent growth inhibition
systems shape bioﬁlm community structure. PLoS Pathog 10:e1004076.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1004076.

50. Stacy A, Everett J, Jorth P, Trivedi U, Rumbaugh KP, Whiteley M. 2014.
Bacterial ﬁght-and-ﬂight responses enhance virulence in a polymicrobial
infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111:7819 –7824. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.1400586111.

51. Stacy A, McNally L, Darch SE, Brown SP, Whiteley M. 2016. The
biogeography of polymicrobial infection. Nat Rev Microbiol 14:93–105.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro.2015.8.

52. Muller S, Strack SN, Ryan SE, Kearns DB, Kirby JR. 2015. Predation by
Myxococcus xanthus induces Bacillus subtilis to form spore-ﬁlled me-
gastructures. Appl Environ Microbiol 81:203–210. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1128/AEM.02448-14.

53. Ren D, Madsen JS, Sorensen SJ, Burmolle M. 2015. High prevalence of
bioﬁlm synergy among bacterial soil isolates in cocultures indicates bac-
terial interspeciﬁc cooperation. ISME J 9:81– 89. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1038/ismej.2014.96.

54. Kelvin Lee KW, Hoong Yam JK, Mukherjee M, Periasamy S, Steinberg
PD, Kjelleberg S, Rice SA. 2015. Interspeciﬁc diversity reduces and func-
tionally substitutes for intraspeciﬁc variation in bioﬁlm communities.
ISME J http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2015.159.

55. Tan CH, Koh KS, Xie C, Zhang J, Tan XH, Lee GP, Zhou Y, Ng WJ,
Rice SA, Kjelleberg S. 2015. Community quorum sensing signalling and
quenching: microbial granular bioﬁlm assembly. NPJ Bioﬁlms Micro-
biomes 1:15006. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/npjbioﬁlms.2015.6.

56. Frenkel ES, Ribbeck K. 2015. Salivary mucins protect surfaces from
colonization by cariogenic bacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol 81:332–338.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02573-14.

57. Cairns LS, Hobley L, Stanley-Wall NR. 2014. Bioﬁlm formation by
Bacillus subtilis: new insights into regulatory strategies and assembly
mechanisms. Mol Microbiol 93:587–598. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/mmi
.12697.

58. Jiang C, Brown PJ, Ducret A, Brun YV. 2014. Sequential evolution of
bacterial morphology by co-option of a developmental regulator. Nature
506:489 – 493. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature12900.

59. Taglialegna A, Navarro S, Ventura S, Garnett JA, Matthews S, Penades
JR, Lasa I, Valle J. 2016. Staphylococcal Bap proteins build amyloid

2562 jb.asm.org

Journal of Bacteriology

October 2016 Volume 198 Number 19

Meeting Review

scaffold bioﬁlm matrices in response to environmental signals. PLoS Pat-
hog. 12:e1005711. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1005711.
60. Allan RN, Morgan S, Brito-Mutunayagam S, Skipp P, Feelisch M,
Hayes SM, Hellier W, Clarke SC, Stoodley P, Burgess A, Ismail-Koch H,
Salib RJ, Webb JS, Faust SN, Hall-Stoodley L. 2016. Low concentrations
of nitric oxide modulate Streptococcus pneumoniae bioﬁlm metabolism
and antibiotic tolerance. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 60:2456 –2466.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/AAC.02432-15.

61. Baker P, Hill PJ, Snarr BD, Alnabelseya N, Pestrak MJ, Lee MJ,
Jennings LK, Tam J, Melnyk RA, Parsek MR, Sheppard DC,
Wozniak DJ, Howell PL. 2016. Exopolysaccharide biosynthetic gly-
coside hydrolases can be utilized to disrupt and prevent Pseudomonas
aeruginosa bioﬁlms. Sci Adv 2:e1501632. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/sciadv
.1501632.

62. Hathroubi S, Beaudry F, Provost C, Martelet L, Segura M, Gagnon CA,

Jacques M. 2016. Impact of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae bioﬁlm mode
of growth on the lipid A structures and stimulation of immune cells. In-
nate Immun 22:353–362. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1753425916649676.
63. Garcia EC, Perault AI, Marlatt SA, Cotter PA. 2016. Interbacterial
signaling via Burkholderia contact-dependent growth inhibition system
proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113:8296 – 8301. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1073/pnas.1606323113.

64. Armbruster CR, Wolter DJ, Mishra M, Hayden HS, Radey MC, Mer-
rihew G, MacCoss MJ, Burns J, Wozniak DJ, Parsek MR, Hoffman LR.
2016. Staphylococcus aureus protein A mediates interspecies interactions at
the cell surface of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. mBio 7(3):e00538-16. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00538-16.

65. Ducret A, Quardokus EM, Brun YV. 2016. MicrobeJ, a tool for high
throughput bacterial cell detection and quantitative analysis. Nat Micro-
biol 1:16077. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nmicrobiol.2016.77.

October 2016 Volume 198 Number 19

Journal of Bacteriology

jb.asm.org 2563

