Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Heliyon 

journal homepage: www.cell.com/heliyon 

Review article 

Coir fiber as thermal insulator and its performance as reinforcing 
material in biocomposite production 

Md. Arif Mahmud a, *, Nafis Abir b, Ferdausee Rahman Anannya c, Ayub Nabi Khan d, 
A.N.M. Masudur Rahman e, f, Nasrin Jamine g 
a Department of Textile Engineering, Ahsanullah University of Science and Technology, Dhaka, 1208, Bangladesh 
b Department of Textile Engineering, BGMEA University of Fashion and Technology, Dhaka, 1230, Bangladesh 
c Department of Textile Engineering and Management, BGMEA University of Fashion and Technology, Dhaka, 1230, Bangladesh 
d BGMEA University of Fashion and Technology, Dhaka, 1230, Bangladesh 
e Bangladesh University of Textiles, Dhaka, 1208, Bangladesh 
f College of Textiles, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, China 
g Department of Apparel Merchandising & Management, BGMEA University of Fashion and Technology, Dhaka, 1230, Bangladesh   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Cellulose 
Alkali treatment 
Insulation 
Conductivity 
Sustainable 
Bio-polymer 

1. Introduction 

Coir is a lignocellulosic natural fiber derived from the coconut’s husk, an abundantly found fruit 
or nut worldwide. This fiber has some unique characteristics, such as its resistance to seawater, 
microbial attack, high impact, etc. But its low thermal conductivity or high thermal insulating 
property  makes  it  suitable  for  being  used  as  insulators  in  civil  engineering  sites.  On  the  other 
hand, the sustainability of a material depends heavily on its environmental impact of the mate-
rial. For making sustainable materials like biocomposite, there are no options other than using 
polymers derived from natural renewable sources. Polylactic acid(PLA) is an  example of those 
types of material. And these materials are often being reinforced by fibers like coir for various 
reasons  including  improving  mechanical  properties,  reducing  the  cost  of  the  material,  and 
improving the material’s sustainability. Many coir-reinforced sustainable biopolymer composites 
have already been produced in many pieces of research, which will be discussed in this paper, 
along with the chemical and physical structure of coir fiber. In addition, this paper will try to 
focus on the insulating properties of coir and coir-reinforced composites while will also compare 
some properties  of  the composites  with  some commonly  used materials  based on different pa-
rameters  to  show  the  suitability  of  using  the  coir  fiber  in  heat-insulating  applications  and  to 
produce sustainable biocomposite materials.   

A Composite is a material made using two or more materials, and the final material would show different characteristics than the 
used materials [1]. Generally, two materials, along with other additives, are used to make a composite material [2]. One of those two 
materials can be a matrix or resin, and the other one can be a reinforcement for the matrix. These reinforcements are used to improve 
mechanical characteristics, lower the material’s weight, improve the material’s sustainability, etc [1,3]. There can be more than one 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail addresses: arif.shawon@hotmail.com, arif.te@aust.edu (Md.A. Mahmud), nafis.abir@buft.edu.bd (N. Abir), ferdausee.anannya@buft.edu. 

bd (F.R. Anannya), provc@buft.edu.bd (A. Nabi Khan), masudfabric@yahoo.com (A.N.M.M. Rahman), nasrin.jamine@buft.edu.bd (N. Jamine).  

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e15597 
Received 22 March 2022; Received in revised form 12 April 2023; Accepted 14 April 2023   

Heliyon9(2023)e15597Availableonline19April20232405-8440/©2023TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierLtd.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBY-NC-NDlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

matrix or reinforcing material while using two different matrix only can also be an option. The reinforcement can be a fiber or some 
particles. The matrix and reinforcing materials can be synthetic polymers or natural polymers, or either can be natural, and the other 
can be synthetic [4]. Composites made of synthetic resin and natural reinforcing material have become very popular nowadays [5–8]. 
These natural reinforcing materials are generally natural fibers. There are several reasons why natural fibers are selected as reinforcing 
material. Natural fibers are biodegradable and non-toxic in general. And in addition, the plants of those fibers also have the ability to 
suck carbon from the environment, which makes these fibers responsible for reducing carbon emission. On the other hand, these fibers 
are generally of very low weight and low cost compared to many synthetic polymers for which these natural fiber-reinforced com-
posites are gaining popularity in automobiles, packaging, military, etc., various sectors [2,9–13]. There is another reason which has 
become very important these days, and that is the biodegradability of composite material. The earth has become endangered due to the 
use of non-biodegradable plastic materials, which are causing various problems when being dumped, such as clogging up drains, 
littering in the rivers and oceans, reducing soil strength, causing the greenhouse effect, and also doing harm to the environment in 
several other ways [14–17]. So, materials need to be biodegradable for the betterment of the environment. Actually, biodegradable 
means materials that are degraded by biological components such as bacteria, fungi, etc [18]. If a composite material contains one or 
more  bio  components  or  natural  components,  then  that  composite  is  called  biocomposite  [2,19–21].  Biocomposites  can  be  fully 
biodegradable or partially biodegradable depending on the materials used for making it [4]. Partially biodegradable ones contain 
either fiber or matrix as the biodegradable material. Actually, these materials are also degradable, but they will take a very long time to 
degrade fully as only the portion containing biodegradable polymer would degrade biologically within a short period, while the rest 
will take a long time. And sometimes, the biodegradable part also tends to degrade more slowly than usual or does not degrade at all 
due to being covered with nondegradable contents, for which these types of composite materials become nondegradable or hard to be 
degraded, both of which are least desirable in terms of the environmental requirements [22]. Both matrix or resin and reinforcing 
material need to be biodegradable to be fully biodegradable. But these types of materials don’t have all the attributes of synthetic 
materials, especially the low price, availability, easy processability, etc., of synthetic materials compared to biobased materials, which 
often limits their applications in many sectors. That’s why natural fiber-reinforced synthetic polymer composites are preferred in all 
sectors these days. When choosing natural fiber, there are many options, such as cotton, jute, flax, ramie, kenaf, sisal, coir, etc [9,23]. 
Coir is a lignocellulosic fiber. It is obtained from the husk of coconut [24]. In this regard, coir fiber can be an excellent option, as it 
contains a low percentage of cellulose and a high percentage of lignin [25]. In terms of production, coir sits behind jute and well ahead 
of flax, ramie, etc., in 2017, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization of United Nations (FAO) [26]. The annual production 
actually was over a million tonnes in that year across the world. It used to be preferred by mariners for rope making because of its better 
resilience and resistance to seawater, as this fiber can tolerate sudden stress or pull, which breaks many other fibers [24]. Coir fibers 
are also known for their thermal insulating property, which makes it suitable for making composites that can act as heat insulators 
[27]. Heat insulators or thermal insulators are resistant to thermal currents. These types of materials help prevent external heat from 
entering or going out. Insulating materials are classified into three categories, namely organic, inorganic, and composite [28]. The coir 
fiber may fall into the category of organic materials which also include wood chips and similar materials. The composite materials can 
include all types of materials, and coir fiber-reinforced composite structures can also be a part of that. The heat insulation property is 
mainly  affected  by  moisture  content,  temperature  difference,  and  bulk  density  of  a  material  which  depend  on  the  physical  and 
chemical structure of the material [29]. The coir has the required attributes to act as an insulator, especially when being used in a 
composite structure which will be discussed in the latter part of this study. In fact, coir has been used in composite developments more 
than in other applications (e.g., in floor-matt and mattresses) nowadays, which includes the uses in many biocomposites. However, 
biocomposite production is not as straightforward as many may think. A sustainable, eco-friendly product is something that uses 
resources or raw materials in a manner that will not harm the ecological balance, but at the same time, the rate of production or growth 
will remain up to the required level [30–32]. So, in producing a sustainable product, both matrix and reinforcing fiber need to match 
that concept. To be selected as a sustainable biopolymer, the polymer needs to be efficient in production, emit the least amount of 
greenhouse gases during production and lifetime, be least costly, and have good enough properties for industrial applications [33]. In 
that case, petroleum-based synthetic polymers can’t be selected because of the emission of greenhouse gases during the production and 
degradation process. Generally, polymers from renewable sources, or more precisely, polymers derived from plants, are the ones that 
can match the requirements of sustainable polymers. The most commonly used biopolymers are polylactide, starch, cellulose, cellulose 
derivatives, etc [33]. On the other hand, the unique characteristics of coir also make it suitable for developing composite materials for 
the thermal insulating purpose, which could be really useful in replacing currently existing synthetic materials, such as polyurethane, 
polystyrene, etc., that are harmful to the environment. This paper will discuss the thermal insulating property of coir fiber and its 
performance as a reinforcing material for some eco-friendly biocomposites. 

Table 1 
Chemical Composition of Coir fiber [2,9,35–38].  

Content 

Cellulose 
Lignin 
Hemicellulose 
Ash 
Pectin and related compounds 
Water-soluble contents 

Percentage 

36–43 
32–45 
0.15–0.25 
2.22 
3 
5.25  

Heliyon9(2023)e155972Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

2. Physical structure and chemical composition of coir fiber 

Coconut contains a protective shell and husk around a nut containing white meat in the inner part called copra. Both green and ripe 
coconuts have water in that nut. The nut is not a quite visible or prominent figure in green coconut, but it gets to its shape after the fruit 
ripens. The white meat covers about 28% of the total weight of the whole thing. In the husk part, about 12–44% of its total weight is 
generally the fibers [24,34]. The fibers are lignocellulosic. It contains cellulose, lignin, hemicellulose, wax, and other materials. The 
chemical composition of coir fiber is given in Table 1. 

The main component of cellulose is a polysaccharide in which the molecular units are linked by β 1, 4 glycosidic bonds [39,40]. It 
contains three hydroxyl groups which produce inter and intramolecular hydrogen bonds with other cellulose chains between the fibers 
[41]. Hemicellulose is termed a matrix polysaccharide [42]. The major components of hemicellulose are xylose, galactose, arabino-
furanose, and glucuronic acid residues. It has quite stable hydrogen bonds with cellulose and is insoluble in hot water [24]. Lignin is 
found in the middle lamella (a glue-like layer that adjoins plant cells) and cell walls of the fiber mostly along with some other places. It 
is a three-dimensional structure made by phenylpropanoid building units, and it is responsible for the stiffness of the fiber [43,44]. The 
fat and waxes are generally found at the surface of the fiber, while the water-solubles are water-soluble materials that can be removed 
by boiling [24,45]. 

Coir fiber has two types: green and brown fiber (Shown in Fig. 1(a–c)) [38]. Fibers collected from green coconut are called green 
coir (Fig. 1 (a and b)), while fibers collected from ripe coconut are called brown coir fiber (Fig. 1(c)). The chemical composition of both 
types of fibers is quite similar. But the green coir fibers are suitable for bleaching and dyeing [34]. In contrast, white fibers are much 
weaker and softer than brown fibers [3]. But the final fibrous materials are almost similar in appearance as the fibers from green 
coconut have a very slight whitish shade in comparison to the fibers from brown shells, and eventually, the shade actually diminishes, 
and both fibers show almost the same color by the time those are used in any application because of drying of the green fibers. Fig. 1 
shows the two types of fibers (Fig. 1(a) and Fig. (b) show the green coconut contents, while Fig. 1(c) shows the brown fibers). 

The fibers are extracted using retting [34,38]. In fact, the physics of coir has made the retting process essential for fiber extraction. 
The physical structure of coir fiber actually helps it to be resistant to microbes. The fibers consist of ultimate fiber cells. The ultimate 
cells of coir are held together by the middle lamella, termed the inner middle lamella. It is chemically linked with cellulose cell walls, 
which make this layer chemically inert, for which the fibers don’t let microbes alter them chemically and show greater resistance to 
microbial attack as a result. But in the case of the unidirectional fibers, which are also held in bundles by another layer of the middle 
lamella, also known as the outer middle lamella, it is not involved in many vulnerable chemical bondings to microbial attack. That’s 
why the fibers can be extracted by retting, depending on the bacterial attack during merging or submerging in water [24]. The bundle 
fibers are shown in Fig. 2. 

Coir fibers are found in bundles, of which about 56–65% of fibers are 150 mm long, while the staple length can be up to 350 mm. 
About 5–8% of fibers (short fibers) are found below 50 mm in length. The fiber fineness varies from 50 to 300 μm, while the individual 

Fig. 1. Images of different states of Coir fiber: (a) Green Coconut shell, (b) Green Coir fiber, (c) Brown Coir fiber. (For interpretation of the ref-
erences to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 

Heliyon9(2023)e155973Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

cells of fibers are about 1 mm in length and 5–8 μm diameter [38]. Generally, the length and diameter of the cells vary depending on 
species, maturity, location of the fiber within the plant, and extraction procedures [24]. 

The brown fibers are generally used in mattresses, automobile seats, brushes, brooms, nets, etc., while the green fiber can be finer 
and more flexible, which can be used in making twine, marine cordage, floor mats, etc. It is very often used in geotextiles for rein-
forcing embankments, preventing soil erosion, drainage, composite making, etc [24,34,46]. 

3. Insulating property of coir fiber 

The tensile properties of coir fiber are inferior to jute, flax, sisal, etc., but the specialty of coir fiber is its superior properties in salty 
water as it can resist salty water and any microbial attack while it can also be stretched beyond its elastic limit without rupture [38,47, 
48]. But the one of the main advantage of coir is its thermal properties. It is often found that when coir is used as reinforcement in 
composites, those composites are known to have low thermal conductivity [49–51]. It is due to the low thermal conductivity of coir 
fiber  which  results  from  several  factors  like  moisture  absorbency,  having  empty  spaces  in  the  fiber  structures  (which  are  also 
responsible for high moisture absorbency), etc [52,53]. 

The thermal insulation property depends on three factors, the operating temperature, the density, and the thermal conductivity of 
the material, while the moisture content is also mentioned by some researchers [29]. The operating temperature cannot be controlled 
as this depends on the environment, and this will affect the conductivity naturally, either in a positive or negative way. The material’s 
density also depends on the materials’ morphological structure. In contrast, the material’s thermal conductivity is controlled by the 
molecular arrangement in the structure. The conductivity in non-metallic materials depends heavily on the vibrational characteristics 
of the material. The highly oriented molecular arrangement helps transfer the vibrational movement in the material, leading to better 
heat conductivity. From that point of view, the amorphous regions offer more resistance to heat conductivity. Another factor can be the 
presence of an aromatic backbone in the structure, which is known to help the heat conductivity of a material. Meanwhile, cross-linked 
structures  and  long  molecular  chains  help  heat  conductivity  also.  This  reason  is  responsible  for  the  comparatively  high 
heat-conducting ability in polymers with a cross-linked structure rather than a linear structure [54]. 

The fiber being focused on here is coir, a cellulosic fiber with a significant amount of amorphous portion within the structure, which 
is relatively high in percentage (around 60%) [55]. It means the fiber should conduct a low amount of heat. Another factor is the 
presence of an aromatic backbone in the structure, which is not present in cellulose, for which all cellulosic materials are slightly poor 
conductors of heat [29,56]. And the cellulosic chains are not cross-linked either, which has been stated as another reason for increasing 
heat conductivity. So, as a result, coir fiber is expected to be quite a low conductor of heat. 

Another important factor stated above is the morphological appearance of coir fiber. For example, the air is known as a poor heat 
conductor, which means if a material can entrap air in its structure, that will definitely show low heat conductivity than usual. Coir 
fiber has a physical structure that is quite porous as about one-third of the structure is filled with air due to having a lot of cavities 
inside the fiber structure, while at the same time, the fiber cells are quite narrow and hollow. It makes the fiber a poor conductor of heat 
[57,58]. And the water-absorbing property that makes the fibers take moisture from the atmosphere is also responsible for the poor 
heat conductivity of the material. These reasons are responsible for making the coir fiber one of the poorest heat conductors. These also 
play a similar role when the coir fibers are used in the composite structure, while the use of synthetic polymers as resins which do not 
have the ability to form chemical bonds with the fibers, suffers more because of the pores created by the fibers that entrap air within the 
composite structure which become responsible for reducing heat conductivity of the material even more. 

The thermal conductivity properties of the material actually shape the other thermal properties. The thermal conductivity and 
thermal resistance of material are inversely proportional to each other as the unit of thermal conductivity is watt per meter per kelvin 
(W/mK) while the unit of thermal resistance is K.m/W. It means a material with low thermal conductivity is going to have high thermal 
resistance and vice versa. Since the thermal conductivity of coir fiber is quite low, its thermal resistance of it is definitely higher than 

Fig. 2. Scanning Electron Microscopic image of Coir fibers (Bundle fibers comprising ultimate cells).  

Heliyon9(2023)e155974Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

◦

usual. This phenomenon also controls the performance of the coir fiber or coir fiber reinforced materials in typical thermal tests such as 
TGA (thermogravimetric analysis), which measures weight loss with applying temperature. The weight loss percentage shows similar 
trends with heat conductivity as the weight loss increases with the material’s heat conductivity and vice versa [59]. So, in that sense, an 
increase in the weight loss of the material means the material would have less resistance to heat. But the thermal degradation tem-
perature  in  TGA  can  show  better  results  for  materials  with  higher  thermal  conductivity  (which  is  expected  to  have  low  thermal 
resistance due to absorbing more heat) if the material has a higher thermal degradation temperature. For example, polystyrene has 
higher thermal conductivity (0.13W/mK) while the degradation is higher than coconut contents (0.04–0.05 W/mK), but the degra-
dation temperature is slightly higher (Up to 425 
C for polystyrene and around 400 
Researchers have already had a few applications of coir as an insulating material. Mintorogo et al. used coir in concrete slab 
◦
roofings [63]. They found the temperature difference in the room air from outside to be 2.8
C while the temperature difference at 
◦
C which helped reduce the energy consumption to 3–9% on average. The experiment took place in 
the rooftop surface was about 13 
◦
Jakarta, Indonesia, where the average temperature varies from 24
C. The comparison was made with a conventional concrete 
rooftop, and the coconut fibers were blended with the concrete materials to build the coconut fiber-reinforced rooftop. The researchers 
found that coconut fiber-reinforced rooftops delayed the release of radiated heat during the hot daytime, for which the temperature 
within the rooms was lesser than usual during the daytime. But the concrete could get cooled quickly, which resulted in slightly cooler 
room temperatures at nighttime, while the coconut fiber released the heat slowly, which resulted in slightly high temperatures during 
nighttime in the rooms. Iwaro and Mwasha developed coconut fiber-filled masonry walls to check the insulating property [64]. They 
compared the results with no insulation and fiberglass filler walls to determine the coconut fiber’s effectiveness as the insulator. They 
found a similar trend as the previously stated research as the energy consumption rate and the temperature during day time was 
significantly lower than the nighttime as the fiberglass showed slightly better performance during nighttime. 

C for coir fiber) [29,60–62]. 

◦
to 34 

◦
-3.1 

◦

On the other hand, the air relative humidity was found to be lesser all through the day in comparison to no-insulator model, but the 
fiberglass again showed slightly better performance. Meanwhile, Brose et al. developed a coir-cement composite as insulator and that 
resulted in 0.16–0.19 W/mK reduction of thermal conductivity. They also found that the compressive strength and modulus of rupture 
of the coir-cement insulator was better, which would help reduction of out-of-plane failure during seismic events like earthquakes 
[65]. So, the examples of using coir as an insulator have not been that high, but all the attempts have shown improvement in the 
insulation property to a considerable degree. 

3.1. Applications in biocomposite materials production 

Coir fiber has also been used in many other composite materials made for different purposes other than insulation. Coir fiber has 
mainly been used with many synthetic polymers for producing composite materials [45,66–71]. But these polymers don’t produce 
sustainable composites as the polymers like polyester, polyethylene, polypropylene, etc., are neither sustainable nor biodegradable in 
nature. These materials are derived from petroleum sources. Even though these polymers have been started to be derived from natural 
vegetable sources these days as for example bio polyesters and bio polyethylene are made from carbohydrates now, and the source of 
these carbohydrates is corn, epoxy, and nylon are derived from oils of sunflower and palm tree, etc [33]. But these polymers have not 
been started to be used in the production of composite materials at a large scale yet. Only a few polymers such as polylactic acid, starch, 
polycaprolactone, cellulose acetate, etc., are used mainly in making fully biodegradable sustainable composites. These polymers have 
problems, such as poor tensile strength, processability, absorbency, etc [72–75]. In fact, the biodegradability property is responsible 
for some of these problems; for example, PLA contains an acetal functional group for which PLA is susceptible to water degradation, 
but without this in the structure, the biodegradability nature would depend on enzymatic degradation only, which is not possible in 
landfills or ocean water [76]. So, it would not be called biodegradable then. Again, all bio-derived polymers are not biodegradable, 
while all petrochemicals are not non-biodegradable (for example, polycaprolactone) [33]. Composites of some common biodegradable 
polymers are discussed below. 

3.2. Coir fiber reinforced starch biocomposites 

Starch is one of the world’s most abundantly produced natural polymers [4]. It is a type of polysaccharide which is consisted of two 
polysaccharides, amylose and amylopectin. Amylose and amylopectin are α(1 → 4) glucan-linked linear and α(1 → 4) and α(1 → 6) 
glucan linked branched polymers respectively [77]. Amylopectin is more soluble and hydrophilic in nature, while amylose is slightly 
hydrophobic. But starch contains more amylopectin, for which starch is very easily soluble in water [4]. The key component of coir is 
cellulose, which is also a polysaccharide. Both contain hydroxyl groups in the structure, which can produce inter and intra-hydrogen 
bonds between cellulose, starch, and cellulose. That’s why starch can be used successfully with coir fiber to produce biocomposites. 
Lomelí-Ramírez et al. produced coir fiber-reinforced cassava starch composites in two different experiments [78,79]. They mixed 
cassava starch with 30% glycerol in a plastic bag. Glycerol was used for plasticizing starch because starch is quite brittle in the dry 
state; plasticizer makes the starch thermoplastic and increases the extensibility of the starch paste [72,80–82]. The fibers and starch 
were mixed in an industrial mixer. They varied the fiber percentage from 0 to 30%. The composites were made in a hydraulic press at 
◦
C under 410.4 kgf/cm2 pressure, and the process was continued for 50 min. The addition of fiber increased tensile strength and 
160 
Youngs’s modulus from 1.56 MPa to 14.56 MPa–3.24 MPa and 59.81 MPa, respectively (for 30% fiber content). While on the other 
hand, water uptake capacity also decreased from over 250%–59.83% in the case of 30% fiber addition in the 4-h absorbency test, 
which shows the significantly high absorbency property of starch compared to a natural cellulosic fiber which is generally known as 
quite good absorbent materials. This high absorbency property of starch has always been one of the major problems of starch, which 

Heliyon9(2023)e155975Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

has restricted its use in producing materials for practical uses [83]. Significantly poor tensile properties in another huge drawback of 
starch which was improved to a quite higher degree by the addition of coir fiber (Coir fibers have superior tensile properties) but still 
within the lower range compared to other common composite materials [4]. An increase in tensile modulus was an indicator of the 
composite’s increased stiffness or hardness property, which needed greater force to cause deformation of the material. This was down 
to the rigid nature of starch resin which is quite brittle at the same time though, but the brittleness was reduced and covered by the use 
of plasticizer and the introduction of coir fibers in the structure, which helped starch to gain a solid shape rather than being a stiff but 
brittle material. The strong and stiffer nature of coir fiber also played its part in the formation of a structure like this. 

3.3. Coir fiber reinforced polylactic acid (PLA) biocomposites 

Polylactide or polylactic acid (PLA) is a biodegradable thermoplastic polymer derived from bio sources, such as corn. It is also 
called  biodegradable  thermoplastic  polyester  [84].  It  is  produced  by  polycondensation  or  ring-opening  polymerization  of  lactide 
monomer in the presence of a lewis acid [85,86]. In industrial production, PLA is produced from starch, as starch is converted to 
dextrose, from which lactic acid is produced via fermentation. Then lactide monomer is prepared from that already produced lactic 
acid, and this lactide then undergoes polymerization [84]. Generally, PLA is known for its very good tensile properties, film trans-
parency, and biodegradability, but it is a bit brittle and may force plasticizer use when required [84]. Since it is a biopolymer, it works 
very well with natural fiber-like coir in composite materials. Nam et al. developed coir fiber reinforced PLA composites [87]. They 
varied the fiber percentage from 10 to 50%, and they also varied the pre-treatment time and concentration of sodium hydroxide for 
◦
treating the fiber. They mixed the dried, alkali-treated, and untreated fiber with PLA resin in a mixer at 180 
C and then formed pallets 
◦
of coir fiber-reinforced PLA, which were dried at 70 
C for 12 h. Then the composite was produced by using those pallets in an injection 
molding machine. Alkali treatment resulted in the removal of waxy and dust contents from the fibers, which helped better adhesion 
between  the  fiber  and  resin  molecules  and  improved  the  composites’  tensile  properties.  They  found  the  best  results  for  72  h  of 
pre-treatment  with  a  5%  concentration  of  sodium  hydroxide. Reinforcing  with  20%  fiber  gave  the  best  tensile  properties,  as  the 
maximum tensile strength recorded was about 59 MPa. Adding more fiber showed a decrease in tensile properties because of poor 
wetting of fiber in a comparatively low amount of resin and the least amount of bonding between resin molecules due to too much fiber 
in between the resin molecules, which is called the agglomeration of fibers. The tensile modulus increased with an increasing amount 
of fiber, though which means the addition of fiber made the composite more rigid, just as it did to the starch composites, as stated in the 
previous section. It is a further sign of the strong and rigid nature of the coir fibers. The thermal stability of PLA composite was also 
improved because of the addition of fiber. It was down to the considerable thermal properties and low thermal conductivity of coir 
fiber. Coir fibers are generally known for low thermal conductivity like other natural fibers due to the absorbent nature and the 
presence of hollows in the physical structure of the fibers [52]. The thermal resistance is down to the cellulosic materials, which 
undergo thermal degradation from 200 
C but alkali-treated fibers show significantly better resistance as the degradation 
C to 370 
◦
◦
starts above 330 
C due to increased crystallinity or the removal of the contents other than cellulosic matters 
C and lasts around 370 
which have better crystallinity and thermal properties compared to other contents of the fibers [62,87]. 

◦

◦

◦

Dong et al. also found that the addition of 20% pre-treated fiber with PLA resin gives the optimum tensile and flexural properties 
(about 15 MPa tensile strength and about 45 MPa flexural strength) [88]. The fiber percentage varied from 5 to 30%. They pre-treated 
◦
the fibers with 2% sodium hydroxide solution for an hour at 70 
C. The composites were prepared in a hydraulic press under 1.5 MPa 
pressure for a 15 min treatment at 180 
C temperature in a more like sandwich structure. But they found a decrement in thermal 
stability because of poor bonding between fiber and matrix, while the biodegradability rate was found to be higher than pure PLA 
because coir fiber is more easily degraded because of having high water absorbency. Jang et al. tried to produce flame retardant 
composite using coir fiber and PLA [89]. They pre-treated the fibers with oxygen plasma (discharge power 100 W) to modify the 
surface of the fibers to improve fiber-matrix adhesion. They varied the fiber percentage from 5 to 10%. The composites were prepared 
using  a  commingled  yarn  structure  (a  hybrid  structure  containing  two  materials  in  the  shape  of  fiber  to  produce  a  continuous 
◦
filament-type structure by using the air-jet [90]) method at 200 
C). Fiber treatment improved the tensile properties, and the addition 
of fiber also improved the tensile strength of PLA, as about 75 MPa tensile strength was recorded for 10% fiber addition, whereas the 
tensile strength of pure PLA was 60 MPa. Plasma treatment reduced the thermal shrinkage of the composite, while the addition of fiber 
also showed the same trend because of having better bonding between fiber and matrix. The flame retardancy was measured by testing 
the LOI (limiting oxygen index value), which was found to be almost similar for the treated and untreated fiber-reinforced composites 
to pure PLA, which mean these treatments do not have any positive impact on this property but also no negative impact was found 
either, and the resulted material would always be flame retardant regardless of fiber addition or non-addition because of having LOI 
above 20 [91]. 

3.4. Coir fiber reinforced polycaprolactone biocomposites 

Polycaprolactone (PCL) is a type of aliphatic polyester synthesized by ring-opening polymerization of caprolactone [92], and it is 
degradable by enzymatic activities [93,94]. It is easily degraded by bacteria and fungi in the environment [95–98]. It is derived from 
petroleum, one of just a few polymers available right now. It is very much hydrophobic in nature, has a semi-crystalline structure, is 
◦
soluble at room temperature, and is very easily processable due to having a very low melting point (about 60 
C) [99]. Its properties 
heavily depend on its molecular weight. If the molecular weight is lower, then the PCL would be a waxy solid material, while if the 
molecular weight is above 20000, then the PCL would be a very strong solid material and these materials generally show similar 
mechanical properties to polyethylene [93]. Because of a very low melting temperature, it is difficult to use alone; instead, it is used in 

Heliyon9(2023)e155976Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

blends or composites more successfully. Obasi et al. produced coir fiber reinforced PCL composite using solvent casting technique 
[100]. They used PCL of 8000 molecular weight and brown coir fiber husk. The PCL was dissolved in Dichloromethane at room 
temperature, and then the fibers were mixed in the solution. The mixture was stirred for 4 h and then sonicated for 20 min, and then the 
mixture was poured onto a glass plate for drying. All these processes took place at room temperature. The fiber percentage varied from 
2 to 5%. Tensile strength of the PCL decreased after fiber addition, though it was comparatively higher at 2.5% addition (12.99 MPa) 
than 2% and 5% fiber loading. This happened because of poor wetting of fiber with matrix and no interfacial bonding between fiber 
and matrix. Wu also produced a coir fiber-reinforced PCL composite [101]. But he used white coconut fiber, which was collected from 
green coconut. He varied the fiber percentage from 5 to 20%. He also used acetic acid-grafted PCL to improve the thermal properties of 
the PCL composite. The fibers and matrix were mixed in a blender, and the composites were made in a hot press. Results showed that 
the thermal properties of PCL changed very little with the addition of fiber or the process of acetic acid grafting. The tensile strength 
decreased (from 37.6 MPa, the strength decreased to 13.9 MPa while 29.8 MPa strength was recorded for 5% fiber loading) with the 
addition of fiber for both types of the matrix but grafted PCL showed comparatively better tensile strength (35.8 MPa for pure grafted 
PCL and 34.5 MPa at 5% fiber loading). It was due to better adhesion between grafted PCL and the fibers compared to the pure PCL. 

3.5. Coir fiber reinforced other biocomposites 

There are just a few other examples of sustainable coir fiber-reinforced biocomposites; polybutylene succinate composite can be 
classed as one of those. Polybutylene succinate (PBS) is also derived from petroleum. A polycondensation reaction between succinic 
◦
acid and butanediol synthesizes it. The melting temperature of PBS is slightly higher than 100 
C), and the degradation 
◦
temperature was above 300 
C, which was almost similar to polyethylene and polypropylene [93,102,103]. Nam et al. Used PBS and 
produced coir fiber-reinforced PBS composite [103]. They varied fiber percentages from 10 to 30%. The fibers were pre-treated in 
3–7% sodium hydroxide solution at room temperature. The duration of pre-treatment varied from 24 to 96 h. The tensile strength of 
coir fiber increased from 139 MPa to 238 MPa after alkali treatment, just as in the previously stated studies where alkali treatment 
improved tensile properties. The maximum strength was recorded for 5% sodium hydroxide treatment for 72 h. The composites were 
◦
prepared in a hot press under 10 MPa pressure at 150 
C temperature for 10 min. The addition of fiber increased the tensile strength of 
the composite from 33 MPa to about 51 MPa. Maximum strength was found for 25% fiber addition while further increment of fiber 
percentage decreased the strength of the composite. Flexural strength also showed a similar trend. Alkali treated fiber reinforced 
composite showed better properties due to having more interfacial bondings than untreated fibers, just as the previous studies. 

◦
C (about 115 

Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) is quite a commonly used biodegradable polymer derived from petroleum sources [93] which is exten-
sively used in the sizing of yarn for fabric production in the textile sector [104]. It is synthesized by polymerizing polyvinyl acetate in a 
free radical polymerization mechanism [93]. It is odorless, colorless, non-toxic, highly water-soluble, and highly resistant to oil and 
grease [105]. Kong et al. used PVA and produced a coir fiber-reinforced PVA composite [105]. They pre-treated the fiber with a 5% 
alkaline solution (made using sodium hydroxide) for 2 h at room temperature. They varied the fiber percentage from 0 to 20% while 
they produced the composites in a compression molding machine at 185 
C within 10 min. They found better tensile properties for 
treated fiber and the tensile strength was found on the rise with fiber loading (Young’s modulus of 4072.81 and 5207.90 MPa for 15% 
alkali treated fiber loading), but the tensile properties were hampered a bit when fiber loading was increased beyond 15% for the 
treated fiber (5450 MPa for 20% untreated fiber loading and 3680.72 MPa for 20% treated fiber loading) because of the increment of 
treated soft fiber compared to untreated hard fibers as soft fibers tend to take lesser space and allowed more amount of fibers because 
treated fibers are comparatively lighter than untreated fibers. It caused aggregation of fibers and reduced adhesion between fiber and 
matrix. On the other hand, alkali treated fiber loading resulted in poor thermal properties than pure PVA due to possible alkaline 
contamination in the fibers, while untreated fibers showed some improvement compared to pure PVA due to the naturally high thermal 
resistance of coir fiber [62]. 

◦

Another natural biodegradable polymer is tannin. Tannin is a type of polyphenol. It has many phenolic groups in its structure [106, 
107]. It is synthesized from various plants, barks of plants, etc [108]. Its molecular weight varies from 500 to 20000 [109]. Tannins can 
be of two types on the basis of the chemical structure and physical properties, hydrolyzable tannins and condensed tannins [110,111]. 
Hydrolyzable  tannins  can be  hydrolyzed  by  acid,  alkali,  and  enzymes, while  condensed  tannins  are  quite  resistant  to  hydrolysis. 
Barbosa Jr. et al. produced a coir fiber-reinforced condensed tannin-phenolic composite [108]. Coir fiber of 3–6 cm length was used in 
random orientation in the composite. The fiber percentage varied from 30 to 70%. The composite was prepared using a compression 
molder. The addition of fiber increased the impact strength of the composite form from 0.016 KN to 0.096 KN. Further increment in 
fiber percentage decreased impact strength because interfacial bonding between fiber and matrix was found to be quite higher in these 
composites, just like the previous research. 

4. Performance of coir fiber in reinforcing the composites based on different parameters 

From the above examples, some common features can be noted, which are. 

4.1. Effect of the type of fiber (surface treated or untreated) 

Alkali treatment of fiber increases the tensile strength of the composite. This trend can be seen in Fig. 3(a and b) where Fig. 3(a) is 
showing the smooth surface of raw coir fiber while Fig. 3(b) is showing the roughened surface of the same fibers after being treated 
with  alkali  [87,88,103]. This  is  due  to  the  increment  in  interfacial bonding  between fiber  and  matrix molecules  [71,74,87,103]. 

Heliyon9(2023)e155977Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Actually, alkali treatment removes the impurities from fiber and exposes lignin to the fiber surface shown in Fig. 3, which makes the 
surface rougher, and it helps to create mechanical bonding between fiber and polymer [103]. 

But too much exposure to alkali can cause too much removal of cuticles and globular parts from the fiber, which makes the surface 
comparatively smoother, and results in comparatively weak mechanical bonding between fiber and matrix. That’s why alkali treat-
ment with 5% alkaline solution for three days at room temperature gave the best results among some different concentrations and 
different duration of treatment in different research. It gave the best mechanical properties of the composites. Other than this, an 
increment of tensile strength may have also happened because the fibers become softer and free of dust and waxy content. It also 
increases the roughness of the surface of the fibers, which helps the formation of mechanical bonds between fiber and matrix. It enables 
the matrix molecules to adhere to the fiber surface even without forming any chemical bonds, especially when high pressure is applied 
during composite production. And also, the improved crystallinity of the composite overall when the treated fibers are used due to the 
compact and highly oriented structure that has been formed by the improved adherence between fiber and matrix molecules also helps 
the tensile properties of the composites [62,87]. 

Fig. 4 contains two examples of PLA composites where the tensile properties varied even though similar products were used. It was 
down to the production process of the materials. The tensile properties of the pure PLA sheet were already lesser for the study of Dong 
et  al. It happened because they used a multi-layered  sandwich system  instead of  single-layer method, which tends  to reduce  the 
mechanical properties of the material due to slippage or easy debonding between the layers in the composite [112]. But it is not always 
the case, and exceptions have been seen very often. Fiber length can also be a reason which was shortest for the study of Dong et al. But 
the other studies did not use too long fibers either to establish this concept. Another difference found in these studies was the alkali 
treatment process which was of only an hour for the study of Dong et al. whereas the other two experiments used 72 h of treatment with 
5% sodium hydroxide, which has very often been specified as a very fruitful ratio for alkali treatment. Meanwhile, the tensile strength 
of two PLA composites and Polypropylene composites has shown a different trend; it may be due to many reasons, including different 
processes of composite production, different fiber length, etc. The scanning electron microscope images showed that two composites of 
PLA have different types of cross-sections, as the amount of void in the composite made by Dong et al. was comparatively higher [88]. 
The alkali treatment has also increased moisture absorption of the composite due to improved absorbency properties of the fibers. 

Fig. 3. Scanning Electron Microscopic images of untreated and alkali-treated fiber.  

Heliyon9(2023)e155978Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 4. Bar diagram of comparison of tensile strength in case of fiber treatment in different composites.  

The introduction of fiber always creates voids in the structure where the water molecules can penetrate. It also affected the thermal 
characteristics of the composite, which is described later. 

On the other hand, fiber reinforcement has not always improved tensile properties in comparison to pure polymer sheets. In fact, 
sometimes the tensile strength decreases when the fiber is added, as this trend is seen in Fig. 5, where it is clear that sometimes the 
tensile strength has been found to be less than the tensile strength of pure polymer sheet after being reinforced with fiber [69,79,87,88, 
100,103,113]. However, some other characteristics like impact strength and biodegradability properties of the composite improved, 
which can be important in some cases according to the desired application of the products [87,108]. Decrement of tensile and other 
mechanical properties by loading small fibers that do not take part in the improvement of tensile or flexural properties but helped 
increase the stiffness of the composites, which affected the mechanical properties like tensile, and flexural, negatively [112]. Poor 
interfacial bonding between the fibers and matrix is another big reason, as found in several pieces of research. Fiber agglomeration can 
also be a big issue if the fiber percentage is not maintained properly. 

Another important point can be the pre-treatment of the fibers. All the studies specified in Fig. 5, which had lesser success or lesser 
improvement or deterioration in some cases in terms of the tensile properties, had one thing in common, neither experiment used 5% 

Fig. 5. Bar diagram of comparison of tensile strength increment percentage in different composites.  

Heliyon9(2023)e155979Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

sodium hydroxide for pre-treatment or did not perform the process long enough or did not perform the pre-treatment at all. This 
matches the previous claim made in Fig. 4 also. The chemical bonding between fiber and resin is always difficult because both ma-
terials are generally found as chemically inactive materials and are considered good in terms of thermal resistance to any chemical 
changes. This makes the materials very unlikely to form any chemical bonding between the fibers and matrix. The Fourier-transform 
infrared spectroscopy of a few of these studies showed that no specific bonds were created between fiber and matrix. This led to the 
deterioration of mechanical properties apart from the cases where proper pre-treatment was used, which helped the formation of 
mechanical bonds between the fibers and matrix polymers. Also, it has been reported in previous studies that the incorporation of a 
similar type of fiber and matrix can give better results due to better bonding between fiber and matrix molecules [45]. It helped in some 
cases only when proper pre-treatment was performed. This problem has also been sorted in some research where the fibers have been 
treated for 72 h with 5% sodium hydroxide solution [62]. 

4.2. Effect of the type of resin 

Natural biodegradable polymer composites have shown better mechanical properties than synthetic polymer composites, as shown 
in Figs. 6 and 7 [45,67,74,87,88,103,113,114]. This may be due to better adhesion between natural, biodegradable polymers and 
fibers than synthetic (non-biodegradable) ones, as it is already known that natural fibers don’t generally work that well in association 
with synthetic polymers unless being undergone surface treatment for reducing the hydrophilic nature of the fiber [45]. Also, the 
tensile strength of pure PLA and PBS is higher than pure polyethylene and polypropylene, as shown in Fig. 5. So better strength of PLA, 
PBS, etc., composites was expected. 

So, according to this figure, the tensile properties and improvement of any mechanical properties depend heavily on the properties 
of the resin material. In fact, it is always expected to get comparatively poor mechanical properties when natural fibers are used with 
synthetic materials because the anisotropic and non-homogeneous composite materials produced from these combinations due to 
totally different types of strength, shrinkage, and surface properties of the resin and reinforcement are destined to fail to improve 
mechanical properties [115]. These combinations generally result in better biodegradability, lesser cost of the product, etc [112]. But 
still, better properties are found very often whenever surface treatments or any other means are used, in addition to improving the 
bonding between the fiber and resin polymers. 

4.3. Effect of fiber on the thermal properties of the composite 

The thermal properties of coir fibers are quite unique, and the composites made using coir fibers have also shown the properties 
associated with coir fibers. The fibers have very good thermal resistance, low thermal conductivity, and better resistance to weight loss 
at heating. These properties are also found in the composites made with coir fiber in considerable amounts. Hasan et al. used long coir 

Fig. 6. Bar diagram of comparison of tensile strength in different coir fiber-reinforced composites.  

Heliyon9(2023)e1559710Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Fig. 7. Bar diagram of comparison of flexural strength in different coir fiber-reinforced composites.  

fiber and short fibrous chips collected from coconut husk with melamine-urea-formaldehyde, and the resulting composites showed a 
gradual increase in heat conductivity when the percentage of melamine-urea-formaldehyde was increased (from 8% to 12%) [62]. The 
results were down to decrement in the amount of coir fiber in the structure, but at the same time, some other important factors played 
vital roles. For example, the density of the composites increased with the increasing amount of resin (due to better bonding between 
the fibers), which reduced the voids within the structure and the percentage of air within the structure. Since air is a bad conductor of 
heat, its presence reduces the heat conductivity of the material, while the absence of air increases the conductivity of the composite 
[116]. 

Besides,  the  TGA  (thermogravimetric  analysis)  results  showed  the  percentage  of  weight  loss  of  the  material  with  increasing 
temperature. The weight loss percentage was found in lower amounts when the composites contained higher amounts of coir contents 
which were also evident in previous research reports [117]. The results actually revealed several important points. The degradation 
occurred in three steps [118,119]. The first step of the degradation took place around 100 
C due to the loss of moisture from the 
structure. The second step took place between 230 and 300 
C due to the degradation of hemicellulose while the cellulose content 
◦
C. The percentage of char or residue depended on the presence of lignin in the composite as a higher 
degraded between 300 and 400 
percentage of coir content presented more lignin in the structure, which resulted in more residue percentage (around 40% for only coir 
contents which was reduced to around 30% when 8–12% melamine-urea-formaldehyde was introduced) after the completion of the 
heating cycle. They also reported the composites showed a slightly higher percentage of weight loss during the first step due to the high 
absorbency of the coir contents, especially after alkali treatment which removed the impurities from the coir as reported before [120]. 
However, the final properties of the material would depend on both the structure’s resin and coir fiber contents. In the case of a resin 
with better thermal resistance or low heat conductivity than coir fiber (e.g., PLA, wool, etc.), the thermal conductivity of the composite 
would be reduced with the addition of coir fiber content in the structure. 

◦

◦

In terms of composites made of biopolymers and coir have not been many in previous years where the thermal properties have been 
studied. A few pieces of research were done on coir-reinforced PLA composites, which showed the same trend as stated above. Sun et al. 
developed PLA composites using 3–7% coir fiber (hydrogen peroxide and alkali treated) and found that the addition of coir fiber 
increased the production of residue or char in TGA results which matches the explanation given above [121]. The same trend was 
followed by Nam et al. [87]. But they also showed that PLA has slightly better thermal resistance than coir, especially at a lower 
temperature when the coir fiber goes through two degradation steps. But at high temperatures, the PLA degrades about 97% of its 
weight while the presence of coir fiber increases the residue percentage, which improves the thermal property of the material slightly. 
They also reported that the alkali-treated coir fiber produced a higher amount of residue in the end because of having a lower amount 
of impurities in the structure, as most of the impurities are removed in the alkali treatment stage from the fibers. In that sense, the 
treated coir fibers are expected to show better performance in terms of flammability as the formation of a high percentage of char or 
residue generally increases the thermal or flame resistance of the material because the flame needs heat to continue burning, but the 
presence of char or residue absorbs heat which reduces the intensity of the flame and eventually reduces the flame [2]. Jang et al. 
showed exactly that as they found that the LOI (limiting oxygen index: the required amount of oxygen for a material to burn [2]) of 
alkali-treated coir fiber composite (PLA composite) was slightly higher than the untreated coir fiber composite [89]. 

Heliyon9(2023)e1559711Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

So, from the above discussions, a few points can be found.  

• Coir fiber has poor thermal conductivity properties, which can help these being used as insulating material. 
• Coir fiber undergoes three-step degradation during heat treatment in TGA, which reduces its ability to withstand lower temper-
◦
atures compared to other materials due to its first two steps of degradation generally occurring by 300 
C. But at high temperatures, 
the temperature resistance of coir is slightly better because of its ability to produce a high amount of residue or char during heating.  

• Due to having better char or residue-forming ability, the coir fiber can be a good option for resisting flame.  
• Alkali treatment reduces the percentage of impurities in the structure, which can lead to a slightly high percentage of weight loss in 

the first step of degradation but increase the formation of the residue. 

4.4. Reasons behind low production of biocomposites 

Even though the above-mentioned points have some proof to show here, these still cannot be taken as guaranteed because these are 
very small sample sizes from which a final result can be given. But these points may be helpful for further research. These assessments 
may give a wrong concept as it is clear here that polymers like PLA, PCL, and PBS can be very good alternatives to synthetic polymers, 
but still, it may seem baffling that’s why these polymers are not being used in all sectors instead of synthetic polymers. It is mainly due 
to the cost of natural polymers, as shown in Table 2 below. 

As it can be seen here, natural polymers are way costlier than synthetic polymers. Reinforcing these polymers with cheap fibers can 
be a very good option; in that case, fibers with a huge production rate will be the best option. That’s why coir fiber has been selected for 
many studies, as it is produced in large quantities worldwide. This fiber is derived from coconut waste, making it cheaper than other 
fibers. This makes it perfect for reinforcing the natural polymers to produce sustainable biocomposites. In fact, the price is always 
expected to be higher for composite materials because of the added options like composite making process, labor cost, etc. So, it is 
essential to reduce costs and the number of processes. And it is clear that coir fibers are generally added to reinforce or to reduce cost as 
it is an inexpensive product due to very easy retting with only water, but a high percentage of fiber is recommended to achieve these 
principles properly. Since coir is one of the lighter fibers among the natural fibers, its use as reinforcement and to reduce the cost of the 
composite material is well justified. But due to poor mechanical properties compared to other commonly found natural fibers, the 
composites made of coir are not expected to be used in many industrial applications where mechanical properties are of the greatest 
interest [103]. Still, due to its very low cost, it can be very useful in products of daily use. 

Another issue to be discussed is the sustainability of the composites discussed in this study. The term ‘sustainable biocomposites’ 
was used at the beginning of this review, which needs quite a few specifications to be fulfilled. As stated earlier, sustainable bio-
composites  must  be  fully  biodegradable,  easily  produced,  cheaper,  and  environmentally  friendly.  The  cost  has  already  been 
mentioned, and, from that point of view, the bio-polymers fall quite far back from the synthetic polymers. In that sense, adding fiber 
and reducing the material cost is a very good option. Another point would be the bio-degradability or the environment-friendliness of 
the materials. Table 3 below shows the degradability nature of the common bio-polymers. 

Table 3 above shows that all the bio-polymers discussed in this study are biodegradable. The duration may vary for different 
polymers, but all those are biodegradable. In that sense, the bio-polymers tick the box for being considered for sustainable production, 
as all other synthetic polymers are non-biodegradable and may take several hundred or even thousand years to degrade. But the 
mechanical properties of all the bio-materials are not up to the mark, though, as shown in the table, for which these can not be used in 
just any type of application if desired. 

The next point is the production or abundant production of the material, and from that point of view, starch is the most easily and 
abundantly found polymer among all the bio-polymers discussed in this study [83]. But starch-based resins have significant problems 
in terms of mechanical properties. PLA is a new concept compared to other common polymers produced from starch sources. It is also 
quite easily found in that sense, but since the production process is not fully established yet in terms of the sustainable system, just like 
the other bio-polymers of this study [128]. But in comparison with the common synthetic polymers, the bio-polymers lack in terms of 
quantity and a well-established sustainable production process. But still, the bio-polymers offer a far greater advantage of sustainable 
production  in  comparison  to  synthetic  polymers.  The  greenhouse  gas  emission  data  can  give  the  clearest  idea  of  any  polymer’s 
environmental impact. Table 4 below will show the greenhouse gas (GHG) emission data for different polymers. 

The GHG emission data shows that the specified bio-polymers are more environmentally friendly in terms of GHG emissions. 
Starch-based resin is the best among these, while PLA is also at the lower end of the chart. It is said that the other synthetic materials are 

Table 2 
Cost of different polymers [122].  

Polymer Resin 

Polylactic Acid 
Starch based Resin 
High Density Polyethylene 
Low Density Polyethylene 
Polypropylene 
Polyester 
Poly Carbonate 
Polyvinyl Alcohol (PVA)  

Cost Range ($/Pound) 

2–2.5 
1–1.25 
0.2–0.5 

1.2–1.5 

Heliyon9(2023)e1559712Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 3 
Bio-degradation nature of different polymers [123–127].  

Nature of Degradation 

Feature 

Polymer Resin 

Duration for Bio- 
degradation 

Polylactic Acid 

Several months or more 

Starch-based Resin 
Poly Caprolactone (PCL) 

About a month or more 
Several months or more 

Poly Butylene Succinate 

A few months 

Degrades by biological means 

(PBS) 

Not easily bio-degradable, needs specific 
condition. 
Degrades by biological means 
Degrades very slowly 

Good mechanical properties but brittle in nature 

Brittle and poor mechanically, but very cheap. 
Poor mechanical properties but good resistance against 
chemicals. 
Thermally resistant but stiffness is insufficient.  

already being synthesized using the most  environmentally friendly  and sustainable system, while the PLA synthesis is still under 
modification to find the optimum level [128]. So, from this point of view, the bio-polymers pass the sustainability mark, while adding 
coir fiber in these resins further improves the GHG emission. 

The last point to be considered would be the properties of the biopolymers. The tensile properties of different polymers are stated in 

Table 5 below. 

Table 5 shows that, among the bio-polymers, PLA is the best one that can match or even go beyond the tensile properties of any 
common synthetic polymers. The other option would be PBS. Then PCL and starch would follow afterward. But by comparing all the 
previously mentioned properties and other features, PLA seems to be the most suitable option from all points of view except the high 
price. The price can be compromised by using coir fiber as reinforcement. These two can match quite well as both have a similar 
density (about 1.25 gm/cc [103,124]) while the tensile properties of coir fiber are quite good too, even though not as good as other 
fibers like jute, flax, etc [103]. And with some further optimization in the production procedure, both the price and GHG emission of 
the PLA can be taken up to the required level, and the addition of coir fiber would help the process as it would reduce the cost and GHG 
emission further and at the same time, the possible deterioration of by the addition of the fiber can be compromised as PLA generally 
has better tensile properties than other common polymers, so a bit deterioration would not be too detrimental for the final product. 
And thus, the production of sustainable biocomposite can be justified. Other than that, the starch-based resin can also be used when 
biodegradation is far more important than tensile properties, especially for our daily-use products, which are used once or twice in the 
product’s lifetime. And the addition of cheap coir fibers would help produce cheaper materials, and thus sustainable biocomposite can 
also be produced. 

5. Conclusion 

This study has been done to learn about the thermal insulating property and the performance as reinforcing material in composite 
structures of coir fiber, a fiber that is produced from coconut waste and found in large quantities all over the world. It is a lignocel-
lulosic fiber, but it doesn’t have all the best properties that are found among natural fibers. Actually, its low cost, thermal insulating 
property, and relatively fair mechanical properties make it suitable for composite material. It has been used successfully in quite a few 
biopolymer composites discussed earlier. The results of those research again showed that it is possible to produce better and more 
sustainable materials from natural, biodegradable polymers. A few composites under discussion have shown better thermal resistance 
and insulating properties which have been used in civil engineering sites. The description of the coir structure also indicated the coir’s 
ability as an effective, low-cost heat insulator that can be used in practical life. But the major drawback is the price of biopolymers, 
which can be solved if fibers like coir, found as a waste material, are used with those polymers in composites. Some factors like alkali 
treatment, use of suitable treatment time, use of suitable resin, etc., that impact the mechanical properties of the final product have also 
been discussed in this study, which may come in handy in future research. And by comparing several properties such as GHG emission, 
tensile properties, nature of the degradation process, thermal properties, etc., the use of bio-polymers to produce coir fiber-reinforced 
sustainable biocomposites has been justified in this study. The results are not up to the optimum level yet, but with some further 
improvement, the level can be reached in the near future, and those modifications will have to be the production of the bio-polymers 
oriented, which will help to reduce the cost further as well as the GHG emission to a far more tolerable level. 

Author contribution statement 

All authors listed have significantly contributed to the development and the writing of this article. 

Data availability statement 

Data included in article/supp. material/referenced in article. 

Financial information 

There is no financial information to share regarding this study. 

Heliyon9(2023)e1559713Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

Table 4 
GHG Emission for different Polymers [128–131].  

Polymer Resin 

GHG Emission (kg C02 equivalent/kg material) 

Polylactic Acid 
Starch based Resin 
Poly Butylne Succinate (PBS) 
High Density Polyethylene 
Low Density Polyethylene 
Unsaturated Polyester 
Epoxy Resin 

1.7 
0.6 
2–2.3 
2.6 
2.9 
7.6 
6.7  

Table 5 
Tensile Properties of different polymers [4,83,103,124,132–137].  

Polymer Resin 

Tensile Strength (MPa) 

Tensile Modulus (MPa) 

Polylactic Acid 
Starch based Resin 
Poly Butylne Succinate (PBS) 
Polycaprolactone (PCL) 
High Density Polyethylene 
Low Density Polyethylene 
Unsaturated Polyester 

21–60 
1–5 
15–35 
16 
15–26 
10–20 
25–40 

Statement of the conflict of interests 

270–1600 
25–35 
400–500 
400 
600–900 
300–400 
900–920  

The authors can clarify that there is no relation of the authors with any subject discussed in this paper which can cause any conflict 

of interests. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 

influence the work reported in this paper. 

References 

[1] M. Loos, Composites, in: Carbon Nanotube Reinforced Composites, first ed., Elsevier Science, 2015, pp. 37–72, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-4557-3195- 

4.00002-3. 

[2] F.R. Anannya, Md A. Mahmud, Developments in flame-retardant bio-composite material production, Adv. Civ. Eng. Mater. 8 (1) (2019) 9–22, https://doi.org/ 

10.1520/acem20180025. 

[3] A. Mwasha, Coir fibre: a sustainable engineering material for the caribbean islands, Int. J. Bahamian Stud. 15 (2009) 36, https://doi.org/10.15362/ijbs. 

v15i0.108. 

[4] R. Amin, A. Mahmud, F. Rahman, Natural fiber reinforced starch based biocomposites, Polym. Sci. 61 (5) (2019) 533–543, https://doi.org/10.1134/ 

S0965545X1905016X. 

[5] B.M.M. Gonçalves, et al., Surface treatments of coffee husk fiber waste for effective incorporation into polymer biocomposites, Polymers 13 (2021), https:// 

doi.org/10.3390/polym13193428, 19. 

[6] M.S. Oliveira, et al., Dynamic mechanical analysis of thermally aged fique fabric-reinforced epoxy composites, Polymers 13 (2021), https://doi.org/10.3390/ 

polym13224037, 22, Nov. 

[7] U.O. Costa, et al., Dynamic mechanical behavior of graphene oxide functionalized curaua fiber-reinforced epoxy composites: a brief report, Polymers 13 

(2021), https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13111897, 11. 

[8] A.C. Pereira, et al., Enhancement of impact toughness using graphene oxide in epoxy composite reinforced with ramie fabric, Compos. Struct. 282 (2022), 

115023, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruct.2021.115023. 

[9] R. Kozłowski, M. Władyka-Przybylak, Flammability and fire resistance of composites reinforced by natural fibers, Polym. Adv. Technol. 19 (6) (2008) 

446–453, https://doi.org/10.1002/pat.1135. 

[10] J. Holbery, D. Houston, Natural-fiber-reinforced polymer composites in automotive applications, JOM 58 (11) (2006) 80–86, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 

s11837-006-0234-2. 

[11] M. Abdelmouleh, S. Boufi, M.N. Belgacem, A. Dufresne, Short natural-fibre reinforced polyethylene and natural rubber composites: effect of silane coupling 

agents and fibres loading, Compos. Sci. Technol. 67 (7–8) (2007) 1627–1639, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2006.07.003. 

[12] M. Souza, C. Garcia, F. Santos, Evaluation of dynamic mechanical properties of fique fabric/epoxy composites, Mater. Res. 22 (1–6) (2019), https://doi.org/ 

10.1590/1980-5373-MR-2019-0125. 

[13] A.C. Pereira, et al., Ballistic performance of multilayered armor with intermediate polyester composite reinforced with fique natural fabric and fibers, J. Mater. 

Res. Technol. 8 (5) (2019) 4221–4226, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmrt.2019.07.031. 

[14] O. Ayalon, T. Goldrath, G. Rosenthal, M. Grossman, Reduction of plastic carrier bag use: an analysis of alternatives in Israel, Waste Manag. 29 (7) (2009) 

2025–2032, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2009.02.016. 

[15] M.A. Mahmud, Development of modified starch coated jute fabric, J. Inst. Eng.: Series E 99 (2) (2018) 149–156, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40034-018-0123-6. 
[16] X. Xing, Study on the ban on free plastic bags in China, J. Sustain. Dev. 2 (1) (2009) 156–158, https://doi.org/10.5539/jsd.v2n1p156. 
[17] R. Moharam, M. Almaqtari, The impact of plastic bags on the environment: a field survey of the city of sana’a and the surrounding areas, Yemen 2, 2014, 

pp. 61–69, no. 4. 

[18] R.A. Gross, B. Kalra, Biodegradable polymers for the environment, Science 297 (1979) 803–807, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.297.5582.803, 2002. 

Heliyon9(2023)e1559714Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[19] S. Kalka, T. Huber, J. Steinberg, K. Baronian, J. Müssig, M.P. Staiger, Biodegradability of all-cellulose composite laminates, Compos Part A Appl Sci Manuf 59 

(2014) 37–44, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesa.2013.12.012. 

[20] P.A. Fowler, J.M. Hughes, R.M. Elias, Biocomposites: Technology, environmental credentials and market forces, J. Sci. Food Agric. 86 (12) (2006) 1781–1789, 

https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.2558. 

[21] M.J. John, S. Thomas, Biofibres and biocomposites, Carbohydr. Polym. 71 (3) (2008) 343–364, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2007.05.040. 
[22] E.F. G´omez, F.C. Michel, Biodegradability of conventional and bio-based plastics and natural fiber composites during composting, anaerobic digestion and 

long-term soil incubation, Polym. Degrad. Stabil. 98 (12) (2013) 2583–2591, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2013.09.018. 

[23] M. Bar, R. Alagirusamy, A. Das, Flame retardant polymer composites, Fibers Polym. 16 (4) (2015) 705–717, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12221-015-0705-6. 
[24] Menachem Lewin (Ed.), Handbook of Fiber Chemistry, third ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2006 https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420015270. 
[25] S. Chapple, R. Anandjiwala, Flammability of natural fiber-reinforced composites and strategies for fire retardancy: a review, J. Thermoplast. Compos. Mater. 

23 (2010) 877–896, https://doi.org/10.1177/0892705709356338. 

[26] FAO, “Food and Agriculture Organization of United Nations, Comparison between production quantity of differnt fiber. http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/ 

#compare, 2019. 

[27] S. Panyakaew, S. Fotios, New thermal insulation boards made from coconut husk and bagasse, Energy Build. 43 (7) (2011) 1732–1739, https://doi.org/ 

10.1016/j.enbuild.2011.03.015. 

[28] 16 - acoustic and thermal insulating materials, in: Y. Li, S. Ren (Eds.), Building Decorative Materials, Woodhead Publishing, 2011, pp. 359–374, https://doi. 

org/10.1533/9780857092588.359. 

[29] L.D. Hung Anh, Z. P´asztory, An overview of factors influencing thermal conductivity of building insulation materials, J. Build. Eng. 44 (2021), https://doi.org/ 

10.1016/j.jobe.2021.102604. 

[30] S. Kara, S. Manmek, H. Kaebemick, An integrated methodology to estimate the external environmental costs of products, CIRP Ann. - Manuf. Technol. 56 (1) 

(2007) 9–12, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2007.05.004. 

[31] A. Gehin, P. Zwolinski, D. Brissaud, A tool to implement sustainable end-of-life strategies in the product development phase, J. Clean. Prod. 16 (5) (2008) 

566–576, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2007.02.012. 

[32] R.J. Baumgartner, C. Zielowski, Analyzing zero emission strategies regarding impact on organizational culture and contribution to sustainable development, 

J. Clean. Prod. 15 (13–14) (2007) 1321–1327, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2006.07.016. 

[33] Y. Zhu, C. Romain, C.K. Williams, Sustainable polymers from renewable resources, Nature 540 (2016) 354–362, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21001. 
[34] M. Faruk, Omar, Sain (Eds.), Biofiber Reinforcements in Composite Materials, Woodhead Publishing, 2014, https://doi.org/10.1016/C2013-0-16470-7. 
[35] F.T. Wallenberger, N. Weston (Eds.), Natural Fibers, Plastics and Composites, Springer US, Boston, 2004, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-9050-1. 
[36] M. Lewin, E.M. Pearce (Eds.), Fibre Chemistry: Handbook of Fibre Science and Technology, vol. 4, Marcel Dekker Inc, New York, 1985. 
[37] R.H. Kirby, Vegetable Fibres: Botany, Cultivation and Utilization, Leonard Hill, London, 1963. 
[38] J.E.G. Van Dam, Coir processing technologies: improvement of drying, softening, bleaching and dyeing coir fibre/yarn and printing coir floor coverings, 

Common Fund For Commodities 6 (2002) 51. 

[39] S. Walford, Sugarcane bagasse: how easy is it to measure its constituents?, in: Proceedings of the Annual Congress - South African Sugar Technologists’ 

Association, 2008, pp. 266–273. 

[40] J.X. Sun, X.F. Sun, H. Zhao, R.C. Sun, Isolation and characterization of cellulose from sugarcane bagasse, Polym. Degrad. Stabil. 84 (2) (2004) 331–339, 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2004.02.008. 

[41] J.F. Kadla, R.D. Gilbert, Cellulose Structure: A Review,” Cellulose Chemistry and Technology 34 (3) (2000) 197–216. 
[42] G. Buschle-Diller, C. Fanter, F. Loth, Structural changes in hemp fibers as a result of enzymatic hydrolysis with mixed enzyme systems, Textil. Res. J. 269 (4) 

(1999) 244–251, https://doi.org/10.1177/004051759906900403. 

[43] R.C. Sun, Cereal Straw as a Resource for Sustainable Biomaterials and Biofuels, first ed., Elsevier Inc., 2010 https://doi.org/10.1016/C2009-0-06759-2. 
[44] B.T. Styles, Pine Kernels, second ed., Academic Press, 2003 https://doi.org/10.1016/b0-12-227055-x/00927-5. 
[45] M. Brahmakumar, C. Pavithran, R.M. Pillai, Coconut fibre reinforced polyethylene composites: effect of natural waxy surface layer of the fibre on fibre/matrix 
interfacial bonding and strength of composites, Compos. Sci. Technol. 65 (3–4) (2005) 563–569, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2004.09.020. 
[46] D. Verma, P.C. Gope, A. Shandilya, A. Gupta, M.K. Maheshwari, Coir fibre reinforcement and application in polymer composites: a review, J. Mater. Environ. 

Sci. 4 (2) (2013) 266–273. 

[47] Md A. Mahmud, F.R. Anannya, Jute in Geotextile,” Tekstilec 51 (1) (2018) 34–40. 
[48] P.R. Rankilor, Textiles in civil engineering. Part 1- geotextiles, in: A.R. Horrocks, S.C. Anand (Eds.), Handbook of Technical Textiles, first ed., Woodhead 

Publishing Limited, Cambridge, 2000, pp. 358–406, https://doi.org/10.1533/9781855738966. 

[49] C. Asasutjarit, S. Charoenvai, J. Hirunlabh, J. Khedari, Materials and mechanical properties of pretreated coir-based green composites, Compos. B Eng. 40 (7) 

(2009) 633–637, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2009.04.009. 

[50] J. Khedari, B. Suttisonk, N. Pratinthong, J. Hirunlabh, New lightweight composite construction materials with low thermal conductivity, Cem. Concr. Compos. 

23 (1) (2001) 65–70, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0958-9465(00)00072-X. 

[51] C. Asasutjarit, J. Hirunlabh, J. Khedari, S. Charoenvai, B. Zeghmati, U.C. Shin, Development of coconut coir-based lightweight cement board, Construct. Build. 

Mater. 21 (2) (2007) 277–288, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2005.08.028. 

[52] H. Takagi, A.N. Nakagaito, K. Liu, Heat transfer analyses of natural fibre composites, WIT Trans. Built Environ. 137 (2014) 237–244, https://doi.org/10.2495/ 

HPSM140211. 

[53] K. Manohar, D. Ramlakhan, G. Kochhar, S. Haldar, Biodegradable fibrous thermal insulation, J. Braz. Soc. Mech. Sci. Eng. 28 (1) (2006) 45–47, https://doi. 

org/10.1590/S1678-58782006000100005. 

[54] Y.Y. Peng, D.D. Dussan, R. Narain, Thermal, Mechanical, and Electrical Properties,” Polymer Science and Nanotechnology: Fundamentals and Applications, 2020, 

pp. 179–201, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816806-6.00009-1. 

[55] B. Bakri Naharuddin, A.E.E. Putra, I. Renreng, H. Arsyad, A.A. Mochtar, Effect of microwave treatment on mechanical properties of coir fibers, IOP Conf. Ser. 

Earth Environ. Sci. 175 (1) (2018), https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/175/1/012001. 

[56] S. Schiavoni, F. D׳Alessandro, F. Bianchi, F. Asdrubali, Insulation materials for the building sector: a review and comparative analysis, Renew. Sustain. Energy 

Rev. 62 (2016) 988–1011, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.05.045. 

[57] C. Yu, Natural textile fibres: vegetable fibres, in: Textiles and Fashion: Materials, Design and Technology, Woodhead Publishing Limited, 2015, pp. 29–56, 

https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-84569-931-4.00002-7. 

[58] M.F. Ashby, Material Profiles,” Materials and the Environment, 2013, pp. 459–595, https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-385971-6.00015-4. 
[59] G.B. Vaggar, S.C. Kamate, S.L. Nadaf, A study on thermal conductivity and thermogravimetric analysis of glass fiber epoxy resin composites modified with 

silicon carbide and copper nanoparticles, Mater. Today Proc. 66 (2022) 2308–2314, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2022.06.230. 

[60] P. Pf¨affli, A. Zitting, H. Vainio, Thermal degradation products of homopolymer polystyrene in air, Scand. J. Work. Environ. Health 4 (Suppl 2) (1978) 22–27. 
[61] A. Simpson, I.G. Rattigan, E. Kalavsky, G. Parr, Thermal conductivity and conditioning of grey expanded polystyrene foams, Cell. Polym. 39 (6) (2020) 

238–262, https://doi.org/10.1177/0262489320934263. 

[62] K.M.F. Hasan, P.G. Horv´ath, Z. K´ocz´an, T. Alp´ar, Thermo-mechanical properties of pretreated coir fiber and fibrous chips reinforced multilayered composites, 

Sci. Rep. 11 (1) (2021) 1–13, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-83140-0. 

[63] D.S. Mintorogo, W.K. Widigdo, A. Juniwati, Application of coconut fibres as outer eco-insulation to control solar heat radiation on horizontal concrete slab 

rooftop, Procedia Eng. 125 (2015) 765–772, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2015.11.129. 

[64] J. Iwaro, A. Mwasha, Effects of using coconut fiber–insulated masonry walls to achieve energy efficiency and thermal comfort in residential dwellings, 

J. Architect. Eng. 25 (1) (2019), https://doi.org/10.1061/(asce)ae.1943-5568.0000341. Mar. 

Heliyon9(2023)e1559715Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[65] A. Brose, J. Kongoletos, L. Glicksman, Coconut fiber cement panels as wall insulation and structural Diaphragm, Front. Energy Res. 7 (2019), https://doi.org/ 

10.3389/fenrg.2019.00009. MAR. 

[66] S.N. Monteiro, L.A.H. Terrones, J.R.M. D’Almeida, Mechanical performance of coir fiber/polyester composites, Polym. Test. 27 (5) (2008) 591–595, https:// 

doi.org/10.1016/j.polymertesting.2008.03.003. 

[67] N. Ayrilmis, S. Jarusombuti, V. Fueangvivat, P. Bauchongkol, R.H. White, Coir fiber reinforced polypropylene composite panel for automotive interior 

applications, Fibers Polym. 12 (7) (2011) 919–926, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12221-011-0919-1. 

[68] S. Siddika, F. Mansura, M. Hasan, A. Hassan, Effect of reinforcement and chemical treatment of fiber on the Properties of jute-coir fiber reinforced hybrid 

polypropylene composites, Fibers Polym. 15 (5) (2014) 1023–1028, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12221-014-1023-0. 

[69] C.Y. Lai, S.M. Sapuan, M. Ahmad, N. Yahya, K.Z.H.M. Dahlan, Mechanical and electrical properties of coconut coir fiber-reinforced polypropylene composites, 

Polym. Plast. Technol. Eng. 44 (4) (2005) 619–632, https://doi.org/10.1081/PTE-200057787. 

[70] C.A.S. Hill, H.P.S. Abdul Khalil, Effect of fiber treatments on mechanical properties of coir or oil palm fiber reinforced polyester composites, J. Appl. Polym. 

Sci. 78 (9) (2000) 1685–1697, https://doi.org/10.1002/1097-4628(20001128)78:9<1685::AID-APP150>3.0.CO, 2-U. 

[71] A. Karthikeyan, K. Balamurugan, Effect of alkali treatment and fiber length on impact behavior of coir fiber reinforced epoxy composites, J. Sci. Ind. Res. 

(India) 71 (9) (2012) 627–631. 

[72] A.A.S. Curvelo, A.J.F. De Carvalho, J.A.M. Agnelli, Thermoplastic starch-cellulosic fibers composites: preliminary results, Carbohydr. Polym. 45 (2) (2001) 

183–188, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0144-8617(00)00314-3. 

[73] G. Bogoeva-Gaceva, et al., Natural fiber eco-composites, Polym. Compos. 28 (1) (2007) 98–107, https://doi.org/10.1002/pc.20270. 
[74] J. Rout, M. Misra, S.S. Tripathy, S.K. Nayak, A.K. Mohanty, The influence of fibre treatment of the performance of coir-polyester composites, Compos. Sci. 

Technol. 61 (9) (2001) 1303–1310, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0266-3538(01)00021-5. 

[75] H. Chi, et al., Effect of acetylation on the properties of corn starch, Food Chem. 106 (3) (2008) 923–928, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2007.07.002. 
[76] A. Mudhoo, R. Mohee, G.D. Unmar, S.K. Sharma, Degradation of biodegradable and green polymers in the composting environment, in: S.K. Sharma, 
A. Mudhoo (Eds.), Handbook of Applied Biopolymer Technology: Synthesis, Degradation & Applications, first ed., RSC Publishing, Cambridge, 2011, 
pp. 332–364. 

[77] J.F. Robyt, Starch: structure, properties, chemistry and enzymology, in: B.O. Fraser-Reid, K. Tatsuta, J. Thiem (Eds.), Glycoscience: Chemistry and Chemical 

Biology, Springer, Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 1437–1472. 

[78] M.G. Lomelí Ramírez, K.G. Satyanarayana, S. Iwakiri, G.B. De Muniz, V. Tanobe, T.S. Flores-Sahagun, Study of the properties of biocomposites. Part I. Cassava 

starch-green coir fibers from Brazil, Carbohydr. Polym. 86 (4) (2011) 1712–1722, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2011.07.002. 

[79] M.G. Lomelí-Ramírez, S.G. Kestur, R. Manríquez-Gonz´alez, S. Iwakiri, G.B. De Muniz, T.S. Flores-Sahagun, Bio-composites of cassava starch-green coconut 

fibaer: Part II - structure and properties, Carbohydr. Polym. 102 (15) (2014) 576–583, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.11.020. 

[80] J.L. Guimar˜aes, F. Wypych, C.K. Saul, L.P. Ramos, K.G. Satyanarayana, Studies of the processing and characterization of corn starch and its composites with 

banana and sugarcane fibers from Brazil, Carbohydr. Polym. 80 (1) (2010) 130–138, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2009.11.002. 

[81] M.E. Vallejos, et al., Composite materials of thermoplastic starch and fibers from the ethanol-water fractionation of bagasse, Ind. Crop. Prod. 33 (3) (2011) 

739–746, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2011.01.014. 

[82] W.N. Gilfillan, D.M.T. Nguyen, P.A. Sopade, W.O.S. Doherty, Preparation and characterisation of composites from starch and sugar cane fibre, Ind. Crop. Prod. 

40 (2012) 45–54, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2012.02.036. 

[83] R. Amin, F.R. Anannya, Md A. Mahmud, S. Raian, Esterification of starch in search of a biodegradable thermoplastic material, J. Polym. Res. 27 (2020) 1–12, 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10965-019-1983-2. 

[84] C. Baillie (Ed.), Green Composites: Polymer Composites and the Environment, first ed., Woodhead Publishing Limited, Cambridge, 2004 https://doi.org/ 

10.1016/C2013-0-17863-4. 

[85] A.K. Mohanty, M. Misra, G. Hinrichsen, Biofibres, biodegradable polymers and biocomposites: an overview, Macromol. Mater. Eng. 276=277 (1) (2000) 1–24, 

https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1439-2054(20000301)276:1<1::AID-MAME1>3.0. CO;2-W. 

[86] R.M. Johnson, N. Tucker, S. Barnes, Impact performance of miscanthus/novamont mater-Bi (R) biocomposites, Polym. Test. 22 (2) (2003) 209–215. 
[87] T.H. Nam, S. Ogihara, S. Kobayashi, Interfacial, mechanical and thermal properties of coir fiber-reinforced poly(lactic acid) biodegradable composites, Adv. 

Compos. Mater. 21 (1) (2012) 103–122, https://doi.org/10.1163/156855112X629559. 

[88] Y. Dong, A. Ghataura, H. Takagi, H.J. Haroosh, A.N. Nakagaito, K.T. Lau, Polylactic acid (PLA) biocomposites reinforced with coir fibres: evaluation of 

mechanical performance and multifunctional properties, Compos Part A Appl Sci Manuf 63 (2014) 76–84, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compositesa.2014.04.003. 

[89] J.Y. Jang, T.K. Jeong, H.J. Oh, J.R. Youn, Y.S. Song, Thermal stability and flammability of coconut fiber reinforced poly(lactic acid) composites, Compos. B 

Eng. 43 (5) (2012) 2434–2438, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2011.11.003. 

[90] T. Gries, M. Raina, T. Quadflieg, O. Stolyarov, Manufacturing of textiles for civil engineering applications, in: T.C. Triantafillou (Ed.), Textile Fibre Composites 

in Civil Engineering, first ed., Woodhead Publishing Limited, 2016, pp. 3–24, https://doi.org/10.1016/C2014-0-01415-3. 

[91] C. R´eti, M. Casetta, S. Duquesne, S. Bourbigot, R. Delobel, Flammability properties of intumescent PLA starch and lignin, Polym. Adv. Technol. 19 (6) (2008) 

628–635, https://doi.org/10.1002/pat.1130. 

[92] F.J. Van Natta, J.W. Hill, W.H. Carothers, Studies of polymerization and ring formation. XXIII. Ɛ-caprolactone and its polymers, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 56 (2) 

(1934) 455–457, https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01317a053. 

[93] S. Ebnesajjad (Ed.), Handbook of Biopolymers and Biodegradable Plastics, first ed., Elsevier Inc., Oxford, 2013 https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-4557-2834- 

3.00006-9. 

[94] Y. Tokiwa, T. Suzuki, Hydrolysis of polyesters by lipases, Nature 270 (1977) 76–78, https://doi.org/10.1038/270076a0. 
[95] H. Nishida, Y. Tokiwa, Distribution of poly(β-hydroxybutyrate) and poly(ε-caprolactone)aerobic degrading microorganisms in different environments, 

J. Environ. Polym. Degrad. 1 (3) (1993) 227–233, https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01458031. 

[96] C.V. Benedict, J.A. Cameron, S.J. Huang, Polycaprolactone degradation by mixed and pure cultures of bacteria and a yeast, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 28 (1) (1983) 

335–342, https://doi.org/10.1002/app.1983.070280129. 

[97] M.J. Motiwalla, P.P. Punyarthi, M.K. Mehta, J.S. D’Souza, V. Kelkar-Mane, Studies on degradation efficiency of polycaprolactone by a naturally-occurring 

bacterium, J. Environ. Biol. 34 (1) (2013) 43–49. 

[98] M. Rutkowska, et al., Biodegradation of modified poly(ε-caprolactone) in different environments, Pol. J. Environ. Stud. 11 (4) (2002) 413–420. 
[99] V. Guarino, G. Gentile, L. Sorrentino, L. Ambrosio, Polycaprolactone: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications,” Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Technology, 

John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2017, pp. 1–36, https://doi.org/10.1002/0471440264.pst658. 

[100] H.C. Obasi, A.A. Chaudhry, K. Ijaz, H. Akhtar, M.H. Malik, Development of biocomposites from coir fibre and poly (caprolactone) by solvent casting technique, 

Polym. Bull. 75 (5) (2018) 1775–1787, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00289-017-2122-z. 

[101] C.-S. Wu, Preparation and characterizations of polycaprolactone/green coconut fiber composites, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 115 (2) (2010) 948–956. 
[102] T. Fujimaki, Processability and properties of aliphatic polyesters, ‘BIONOLLE’, synthesized by polycondensation reaction, Polym. Degrad. Stabil. 59 (1–3) 

(1998) 209–214. 

[103] T.H. Nam, S. Ogihara, N.H. Tung, S. Kobayashi, Effect of alkali treatment on interfacial and mechanical properties of coir fiber reinforced poly(butylene 

succinate) biodegradable composites, Compos. B Eng. 42 (6) (2011) 1648–1656, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2011.04.001. 

[104] J. Fromageau, E. Brusseau, D. Vray, G. Gimenez, P. Delachartre, Characterization of PVA cryogel for intravascular ultrasound elasticity imaging, IEEE Trans. 

Ultrason. Ferroelectrics Freq. Control 50 (1) (2003) 1318–1324, https://doi.org/10.1109/TUFFC.2003.1244748. 

[105] I. Kong, J.T. Bick Shang, K.Y. Tshai, Study of properties of coconut fibre reinforced poly (vinyl alcohol) as biodegradable composites, ARPN J. Eng. Appl. Sci. 

11 (1) (2016) 135–143. 

Heliyon9(2023)e1559716Md.A. Mahmud et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                 

[106] A. Moubarik, A. Pizzi, A. Allal, F. Charrier, B. Charrier, Cornstarch and tannin in phenol-formaldehyde resins for plywood production, Ind. Crop. Prod. 30 (2) 

(2009) 188–193, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2009.03.005. 

[107] M.A. Mosiewicki, M.I. Aranguren, A.A.S. Curvelo, J. Borrajo, Effect of natural rubber on wood-reinforced tannin composites, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 105 (4) 

(2007) 1825–1832, https://doi.org/10.1002/app.26276. 

[108] V. Barbosa, E.C. Ramires, I.A.T. Razera, E. Frollini, Biobased composites from tannin-phenolic polymers reinforced with coir fibers, Ind. Crop. Prod. 32 (3) 

(2010) 305–312, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2010.05.007. 

[109] S. Patachia, C. Croitoru, Biopolymers for wood preservation, in: F. Pacheco-Torgal, V. Ivanov, N. Karak, H. Jonkers (Eds.), Biopolymers and Biotech 
Admixtures for Eco-Efficient Construction Materials, Elsevier Ltd, 2016, pp. 305–332, https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-100214-8.00014-2. 

[110] I. Mueller-Harvey, Analysis of hydrolysable tannins, Anim. Feed Sci. Technol. 91 (1–2) (2001) 3–20, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0377-8401(01)00227-9. 
[111] C. Pe˜na, M. Larra˜naga, N. Gabilondo, A. Tejado, J.M. Echeverria, I. Mondragon, Synthesis and characterization of phenolic novolacs modified by chestnut and 

mimosa tannin extracts, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 100 (6) (2006) 4412–4419, https://doi.org/10.1002/app.22923. 

[112] B.D. Agarwal, L.J. Broutman, K. Chandrashekhara, Analysis and Performance of Fiber Composites, third ed., 3rd ed. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 

2015 https://doi.org/10.1016/0921-5093(92)90189-8. 

[113] M.M. Haque, M. Hasan, M.S. Islam, M.E. Ali, Physico-mechanical properties of chemically treated palm and coir fiber reinforced polypropylene composites, 

Bioresour. Technol. 100 (20) (2009) 4903–4906, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2009.04.072. 

[114] S. Biswas, S. Kindo, A. Patnaik, Effect of fiber length on mechanical behavior of coir fiber reinforced epoxy composites, Fibers Polym. 12 (1) (2011) 73–78, 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s12221-011-0073-9. 

[115] Md A. Mahmud, F.R. Anannya, Sugarcane bagasse - a source of cellulosic fiber for diverse applications, Heliyon 7 (8) (2021), https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 

heliyon.2021.e07771, 1-14. 

[116] V. Gunaa, et al., Journal of Building Engineering Wool and coir fiber rein forced gypsum ceiling tiles with enhanced stability and acoustic and thermal 

resistance, J. Build. Eng. 41 (2020) 2021, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2021.102433. December. 

[117] H. Essabir, M.O. Bensalah, D. Rodrigue, R. Bouhfid, A. Qaiss, Structural , mechanical and thermal properties of bio-based hybrid composites from waste coir 

residues : fibers and shell particles, Mech. Mater. 93 (2016) 134–144, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mechmat.2015.10.018. 

[118] J.C. dos Santos, R.L. Siqueira, L.M.G. Vieira, R.T.S. Freire, V. Mano, T.H. Panzera, Effects of sodium carbonate on the performance of epoxy and polyester coir- 

reinforced composites, Polym. Test. 67 (2018) 533–544. 

[119] N. Prasad, V.K. Agarwal, S. Sinha, Thermal degradation of coir fiber reinforced low-density polyethylene composites 25 (2) (2018) 363–372, https://doi.org/ 

10.1515/secm-2015-0422. 

[120] N. Ezekiel, B. Ndazi, C. Nyahumwa, S. Karlsson, Effect of temperature and durations of heating on coir fibers, Ind. Crop. Prod. 33 (3) (2011) 638–643, https:// 

doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2010.12.030. 

[121] Z. Sun, L. Zhang, D. Liang, W. Xiao, J. Lin, Mechanical and Thermal Properties of PLA Biocomposites Reinforced by Coir Fibers vol. 2017, 2017, pp. 1–9. 
[122] K. Hamad, M. Kaseem, Y.G. Ko, F. Deri, Biodegradable polymer blends and composites: an overview, Polym. Sci. 56 (6) (2014) 812–829, https://doi.org/ 

10.1134/S0965545X14060054. 

[123] S.A. Rafiqah, et al., A review on properties and application of bio-based poly(Butylene succinate), Polymers 13 (9) (2021) 1–28, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 

polym13091436. 

[124] N.F. Zaaba, M. Jaafar, A review on degradation mechanisms of polylactic acid: hydrolytic, photodegradative, microbial, and enzymatic degradation, Polym. 

Eng. Sci. 60 (9) (2020) 2061–2075, https://doi.org/10.1002/pen.25511. 

◦

[125] M. Kunioka, F. Ninomiya, M. Funabashi, Biodegradation of poly(butylene succinate) powder in a controlled compost at 58

C evaluated by naturally-occurring 
carbon 14 amounts in evolved CO2 based on the ISO 14855-2 method, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 10 (10) (2009) 4267–4283, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms10104267. 

[126] M. Bartnikowski, T.R. Dargaville, S. Ivanovski, D.W. Hutmacher, Degradation mechanisms of polycaprolactone in the context of chemistry, geometry and 

environment, Prog. Polym. Sci. 96 (2019) 1–20, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progpolymsci.2019.05.004. 

[127] A.H.M. Zain, M.K. Ab Wahab, H. Ismail, Biodegradation behaviour of thermoplastic starch: the roles of carboxylic acids on cassava starch, J. Polym. Environ. 

26 (2) (2018) 691–700, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10924-017-0978-5. 

[128] E. Rezvani Ghomi, et al., The life cycle assessment for polylactic acid (PLA) to make it a low-carbon material, Polymers 13 (11) (2021) 1–16, https://doi.org/ 

10.3390/polym13111854. 

[129] P. Usubharatana, H. Phungrassami, Carbon footprint of cassava starch production in North-Eastern Thailand, Procedia CIRP 29 (2015) 462–467, https://doi. 

org/10.1016/j.procir.2015.02.031. 

[130] M.L.M. Broeren, L. Kuling, E. Worrell, L. Shen, Environmental impact assessment of six starch plastics focusing on wastewater-derived starch and additives, 

Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 127 (2017) 246–255, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.09.001. July. 

[131] J.M. Chard, L. Basson, G. Creech, D.A. Jesson, P.A. Smith, Shades of green: life cycle assessment of a urethane methacrylate/unsaturated polyester resin system 

for composite materials, Sustainability 11 (2019), https://doi.org/10.3390/su11041001, 4. 

[132] R.E. Cameron, A. Kamvari-Moghaddam, Synthetic bioresorbable polymers, in: Durability and Reliability of Medical Polymers, Woodhead Publishing Limited, 

2012, pp. 96–118, https://doi.org/10.1533/9780857096517.1.96. 

[133] N. Sangviroon, P. Potiyaraj, Thermal and mechanical properties of poly(butylene succinate) films reinforced with silica, MATEC Web of Conferences 30 (2015) 

2–4, https://doi.org/10.1051/matecconf/20153001013. 

[134] V.P. Cyras, L.B. Manfredi, M.T. Ton-That, A. V´azquez, Physical and mechanical properties of thermoplastic starch/montmorillonite nanocomposite films, 

Carbohydr. Polym. 73 (1) (2008) 55–63, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2007.11.014. 

[135] Mohammad Amjadi, Fatemi Ali, Tensile behavior of high-density polyethylene including the effects of processing technique, Polymers 12 (2020), 1857. 
[136] A. Romisuhani, H. Salmah, H. Akmal, Tensile properties of low density polypropylene (LDPE)/palm kernel shell (PKS) biocomposites: the effect of acrylic acid 

(AA), IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 11 (2010), 012001, https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899x/11/1/012001. 

[137] G. Gündüz, D. Erol, N. Akkas¸, Mechanical properties of unsaturated polyester-isocyanate hybrid polymer network and its E-glass fiber-reinforced composite, 

J. Compos. Mater. 39 (17) (2005) 1577–1589, https://doi.org/10.1177/0021998305051086. 

Heliyon9(2023)e1559717