Review
Glassy Carbon: A Promising Material for Micro-
and Nanomanufacturing

Swati Sharma

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute of Microstructure Technology, Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1,
76334 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany; swati.sharma@kit.edu; Tel.: +49-721-608-29317

Received: 20 August 2018; Accepted: 18 September 2018; Published: 28 September 2018

Abstract: When certain polymers are heat-treated beyond their degradation temperature in the
absence of oxygen, they pass through a semi-solid phase, followed by the loss of heteroatoms and the
formation of a solid carbon material composed of a three-dimensional graphenic network, known
as glassy (or glass-like) carbon. The thermochemical decomposition of polymers, or generally of
any organic material, is deﬁned as pyrolysis. Glassy carbon is used in various large-scale industrial
applications and has proven its versatility in miniaturized devices. In this article, micro and nano-scale
glassy carbon devices manufactured by (i) pyrolysis of specialized pre-patterned polymers and
(ii) direct machining or etching of glassy carbon, with their respective applications, are reviewed.
The prospects of the use of glassy carbon in the next-generation devices based on the material’s history
and development, distinct features compared to other elemental carbon forms, and some large-scale
processes that paved the way to the state-of-the-art, are evaluated. Selected support techniques such
as the methods used for surface modiﬁcation, and major characterization tools are brieﬂy discussed.
Barring historical aspects, this review mainly covers the advances in glassy carbon device research
from the last ﬁve years (2013–2018). The goal is to provide a common platform to carbon material
scientists, micro/nanomanufacturing experts, and microsystem engineers to stimulate glassy carbon
device research.

Keywords: glassy carbon; nanomanufacturing; microfabrication; non-graphitizing carbon; pyrolysis;
surface modiﬁcation

1. Introduction

Carbon has undoubtedly dominated the material science and engineering research in the last two
decades. Among various carbon forms, graphene and its derivatives are the most extensively studied
materials, which have resulted in nearly 200000 publications since 1995 [1]. Some synthetic carbon
forms (i.e., obtained by a bottom-up manufacturing approach), such as fullerenes, offer intriguing
scientiﬁc questions, for example, related to the rehybridization of the π-atomic orbital [2,3]. Others,
such as graphene ﬂakes and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), have attracted considerable attention towards
their usability in micro and nano devices [4,5]. The most common, scalable approach for fabricating
graphene and CNT-based devices involves mixing these materials (in bulk) with a binder or glue,
followed by patterning the thus obtained ‘inks’ onto suitable substrates [6,7]. These fabrication
techniques are scalable, but are limited to two-dimensional geometries. The desirable characteristic
properties of the individual nanocarbon units are often compromised due to their interaction with
the binder [8]. Moreover, handling carbon nanomaterials in powder form is challenging due to their
extremely light weight and a lack of safety data on the potential health hazards [9].

A different, top-down manufacturing approach for fabricating graphene-rich carbon devices is to
pattern a polymer using widespread lithographic techniques, and carbonize these structures using
the pyrolysis process [10,11]. In the last two decades, a variety of microfabrication techniques that

Materials 2018, 11, 1857; doi:10.3390/ma11101857

www.mdpi.com/journal/materials

materials(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Materials 2018, 11, 1857

2 of 21

utilize radiation-induced lithography have been developed for polymer patterning in the micro/nano
scale. Notable examples include photolithography [12], two-photon lithography [13,14], nanoimprint
lithography [15,16], X-ray lithography [17], and their combinations. These techniques typically entail
a patternable polymer (resist) that can be spin-coated or drop-casted onto a suitable substrate (e.g.,
silicon wafer) and baked to yield a dry ﬁlm, which is well below its glass-transition temperature (Tg)
at the time of the radiation exposure.

Phenol-formaldehyde (PF) resins, which are well-known glassy carbon precursors, are optimum
as resist materials, owing to their thermosetting character, availability in various viscosities, and the
possibility of incorporating epoxy side groups that facilitate a chemical ampliﬁcation after the photoacid
generation [18,19]. Consequently, several commercially available photoresists, such as SU-8, AZ resists,
mr-NIL resists (tradenames) are primarily composed these resins. Other resists include acrylate-based
polymers [20,21] and various inorganic materials [22–24], and may entail further optimization when
used in the nano-scale fabrication [13,15]. Some of these resists would yield none, or extremely small
quantities of carbon on pyrolysis, which may have signiﬁcantly different properties compared to glassy
carbon. Even in the case of a known glassy carbon precursor, a detailed evaluation of the material
properties prior to device fabrication is essential, since the actual microstructure of the resulting carbon
is inﬂuenced by various manufacturing and pyrolysis conditions [25–27]. Notably, the exact chemical
composition of the commercial resists is often patent-bound; only the elementary chemical unit is
disclosed, which provides the ﬁrst cues on the possibility of its carbonization and the nature of the
resulting carbon, but may not be sufﬁcient for a complete assessment of the carbonization mechanism.
The focus of this article is glassy carbon-based devices, therefore, only those resists that yield this
material are of interest.

In addition to the carbonization of patterned polymers, device-compatible micro/nano structures
can be realized by directly machining glassy carbon. Although this material is difﬁcult to machine,
methods, such as electrochemical [28] and thermochemical [29] etching, Focused Ion Beam (FIB)
In this contribution,
milling [30], and laser machining [31] have been employed to pattern it.
some recent glassy carbon micro/nano devices fabricated using both strategies are described.
Physicochemical properties of nano-scale glassy carbon where the structure size plays a vital role,
and thus renders it dissimilar to the bulk manufactured material, are detailed. An attempt is made to
classify all polymer-derived carbons, and correctly place glassy carbon among them. Concerns that
have experienced competing views from researchers and are still open for discussion, for example,
related to the purity of the low-temperature glassy carbon at the nano-scale, as well as and some
nomenclature issues, are evaluated. Prior to indulging into the current research on glassy carbon,
a brief history of the development of pyrolytic carbons and their early applications is presented below.

2. Brief History of Pyrolytic Carbons

In the early 20th century, graphite became a preferred substitute for metals in various applications,
such as battery electrodes and lightweight aircraft parts. Graphite was also widely used as the
moderator in the nuclear reactors, and as a high-temperature resistant manufacturing material in the
space vehicles (e.g., rocket nozzles, nose shields [32]). This increasing commercial demand motivated
the research on artiﬁcial graphite and graphite-like materials, which could be produced in large
quantities and featured a relatively high purity. As a result, thermal treatment of various organic
materials, and the properties of the resulting carbon were extensively studied in the early- and
mid-20th century [32,33]. These carbon materials were designated ‘pyrolytic carbon’ or ‘pyrolytic
graphite’. It was soon established that the carbon obtained from different precursors had measureable
differences in terms of both microstructure and properties. Some were similar to polycrystalline
graphite (ABABA type crystal structure), while others featured randomly oriented small graphitic
crystallites with a larger interlayer separation and misaligned basal planes, and could not be converted
into graphite, even at very high temperatures. These were called non-graphitizing carbons [34] (details
in Section 4.2), and were primarily studied using X-ray diffraction (XRD) techniques during their

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

3 of 21

early development [35,36]. Glassy carbon belongs to this category, which is methodically explained
in Section 4.

3. Pyrolysis

The term pyrolysis is not limited to the heat-treatment of polymers, it deﬁnes the thermochemical
decomposition of any organic precursor, including gaseous hydrocarbons (e.g., acetylene [32,37,38]),
hydrocarbon-rich oils [39] and various petroleum byproducts [40]. Gas-phase pyrolysis (i.e., thermal
cracking of hydrocarbons [41,42]) followed by carbon deposition is generally referred to as the
Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) of carbonaceous materials in the contemporary literature [43].
Another well-known application of pyrolysis is in the treatment of waste polymers (both synthetic
and natural) for biofuel [1,44,45], and biogas [46] production. Here, the heat treatment temperatures
can be below 900 ◦C, and occasionally the environment may even contain oxygen [47,48], depending
on what is expected as the end-product. Pyrolysis is also used in the context of metallurgy (e.g.,
in pyrometallurgy [49]), where the desirable end-product is usually not carbon [50]. In this article,
only the pyrolysis utilized for converting polymers into carbon, especially glassy carbon, is discussed.
In order to avoid any confusion, the term ‘polymer-derived carbon’ is used where necessary.

When a polymer is heated above its degradation temperature, carbon-heteroatom bonds start
to cleave, which is followed by the formation of the new carbon-carbon bonds [25,51,52]. During the
early pyrolysis stages, various hydrocarbon radicals are generated with their highest concentration
at around 600 ◦C [52]. After 800 ◦C, a network of graphene fragments; containing a large fraction of
defects as well as chemical impurities, starts to develop [53]. Further heat allows for the annealing of
the defects and an increase in the graphene crystallite size (La) and stack thickness (Lc). The absence of
oxygen minimizes the CO2 and CO formation (i.e., burning), however, if there is any (bonded) oxygen
in the polymer itself, some oxides are generated. Other pyrolysis products, such as CH4 and small
hydrocarbons [54], are volatile that are released in the form of bubbles [55].

Various theories exist on the mechanism of the formation of elemental carbon from a decomposed
polymer. For example, it has been proposed that the polymer chains serve as the nucleation point
for the resulting graphenic structures in the case of synthetic resins; thus, the graphene crystallites
(in glassy carbon) are ribbon or ﬁbril-like [56]. Another theory supports the formation of liquid
crystals [57], which subsequently condense to yield a graphitic carbon. In a recent study [53], it was
established that the polymer fragments feature a variety of shapes and sizes, which are mobile during
the initial pyrolysis stages (500–800 ◦C), and are constantly trying to attain a thermodynamically
stable arrangement by separating from, and merging into, each other [53]. There seems to be no
speciﬁc pattern in the formation of these fragments. This study, however, is speciﬁc to a PF resin.
Other polymers may display signiﬁcantly different disintegration patterns and fragment mobility.
For example, pyrolysis mechanism of cellulose (also see Section 4.3) is quite different from that of the
resins, which has been studied for over a century [58]. Various polyimides, polyvinyl chloride (PVC),
pyridine, etc. have their own characteristic pyrolysis products and reaction kinetics. Major factors that
inﬂuence the nature of the resulting carbon include the chemical composition of the precursor [26,59],
structure size [26,60], heating conditions [26,55], forces applied during fabrication [27], and in the case
of epoxy resins, the extent of crosslinking [61].

In addition to the experimental research, there have been various theoretical investigations,
for example using the Reactive Molecular Dynamics simulations, for understanding the pyrolysis
mechanism of speciﬁc polymers [62–64]. In a study by Desai et al. [62], it was indicated that the
primary fragments formed after the decomposition of a PF resin contain atoms from the neighboring
polymer chains in addition to the parent molecule. This ﬁnding supports the idea that there are
no speciﬁc patterns or well-deﬁned graphene nucleation points during the initial pyrolysis and
carbon-carbon bond formation stages. Nonetheless, it has been conﬁrmed by both theoretical and
experimental investigation that the chemical composition of the polymer plays the most important

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

4 of 21

role in determining the nature of the resulting carbon. Therefore, polymer-derived carbons can be
segregated to a ﬁrst approximation based on the nature of the precursor.

4. Polymer-Derived Carbon

A classiﬁcation of polymer-derived carbon based on the precursors is shown in Figure 1, followed

by a brief explanation of the terminology.

Figure 1. Classiﬁcation of carbon materials obtained by pyrolysis of polymers. SEM images: Bottom-left:
SU-8 micropillars with a suspended SU-8 ﬁber [65] showing coking (scale bar: 50 µm), and Bottom-right:
a tree bark carbonized by charring (scale bar: 10 µm). Both precursors are pyrolyzed at 900 ◦C at a
temperature ramp rate of 5 ◦C/min in a nitrogen environment.

4.1. Coking and Charring

If the pyrolysis product (mixture of all intermediate materials at any given temperature) goes
through a semi-solid (rubbery) phase, owing to the fact that its Tg falls just below the process
temperature [21,66], this phenomenon is known as coking [25]. The Scanning Electron Microscope
(SEM) image in the bottom-left of Figure 1 represents a carbonized structure where a ﬁber was
intentionally suspended onto an array of hollow micropillars (pillar diameter: ~5x ﬁber thickness;
all structures fabricated in SU-8 [65]). It can be observed that the pillars attached to the ﬁber are
deformed because of the tensile stretching in the ﬁber during pyrolysis. Other pillars shrink uniformly,
indicating that the Tg of the pyrolysis mixture was only slightly below the set temperature. As this gap
increases, the patterned structures further deform [21], and when it is signiﬁcantly large (e.g., in the
case of polyethylene), mostly oil-like materials are obtained [67]. The semi-solid intermediate material
is responsible for a smooth surface of the resulting carbon, as it tries to minimize its surface energy.
Examples of coking polymers are PF resins (yield non-graphitizing carbon [25]), and anthracene (yields
graphitizing carbon [68]).

Charring refers to a direct conversion of the rigid polymer structure into carbon, where the shape
is preserved both macro- and microscopically. Wood and other cellulosic polymers are good examples
of charring (see the bottom-right SEM image in Figure 1). The major and most studied intermediate
formed during cellulose pyrolysis is known as levoglucosan [69,70], which further disintegrates via
different pathways leading to the formation of tars (oil-like materials), volatiles and solid carbon [70].
These phases generally coexist and remain distinct throughout the process. The solid carbon backbone
is replicated in the ﬁnal char, and the oils and volatiles are collected and distilled if so desired [1].
Cellulosic materials do encounter some softening in the 230–255 ◦C region, but it is not directly
correlated with either Tg or the melting point [58]. Chars are predominantly non-graphitizing, and
due to their porosity and surface chemistry, often serve as activated carbons. Pyrolysis of natural wood
is more complex due to the presence of lignin and hemicellulose [1], which is not detailed here.

Carbonaceous residues obtained from biodegradable natural polymers at temperatures <900 ◦C
are often called biochars. The term char may also occasionally signify the solid carbon formation from

Materials 2018, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 24 4. Polymer-Derived Carbon A classification of polymer-derived carbon based on the precursors is shown in Figure 1, followed by a brief explanation of the terminology.   Figure 1. Classification of carbon materials obtained by pyrolysis of polymers. SEM images: Bottom-left: SU-8 micropillars with a suspended SU-8 fiber [65] showing coking (scale bar: 50 µm), and Bottom-right: a tree bark carbonized by charring (scale bar: 10 µm). Both precursors are pyrolyzed at 900 °C at a temperature ramp rate of 5 °C/min in a nitrogen environment. 4.1. Coking and Charring If the pyrolysis product (mixture of all intermediate materials at any given temperature) goes through a semi-solid (rubbery) phase, owing to the fact that its Tg falls just below the process temperature [21,66], this phenomenon is known as coking [25]. The Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) image in the bottom-left of Figure 1 represents a carbonized structure where a fiber was intentionally suspended onto an array of hollow micropillars (pillar diameter: ~5x fiber thickness; all structures fabricated in SU-8 [65]). It can be observed that the pillars attached to the fiber are deformed because of the tensile stretching in the fiber during pyrolysis. Other pillars shrink uniformly, indicating that the Tg of the pyrolysis mixture was only slightly below the set temperature. As this gap increases, the patterned structures further deform [21], and when it is significantly large (e.g., in the case of polyethylene), mostly oil-like materials are obtained [67]. The semi-solid intermediate material is responsible for a smooth surface of the resulting carbon, as it tries to minimize its surface energy. Examples of coking polymers are PF resins (yield non-graphitizing carbon [25]), and anthracene (yields graphitizing carbon [68]). Charring refers to a direct conversion of the rigid polymer structure into carbon, where the shape is preserved both macro- and microscopically. Wood and other cellulosic polymers are good examples of charring (see the bottom-right SEM image in Figure 1). The major and most studied intermediate formed during cellulose pyrolysis is known as levoglucosan [69,70], which further disintegrates via different pathways leading to the formation of tars (oil-like materials), volatiles and solid carbon [70]. These phases generally coexist and remain distinct throughout the process. The solid carbon backbone is replicated in the final char, and the oils and volatiles are collected and distilled if so desired [1]. Cellulosic materials do encounter some softening in the 230–255 °C region, but it is not directly correlated with either Tg or the melting point [58]. Chars are predominantly non-graphitizing, and due to their porosity and surface chemistry, often serve as activated carbons. Pyrolysis of natural wood is more complex due to the presence of lignin and hemicellulose [1], which is not detailed here.  Carbonaceous residues obtained from biodegradable natural polymers at temperatures <900 °C are often called biochars. The term char may also occasionally signify the solid carbon formation from polymers, even after initial coking [25]. Importantly, the nomenclature of carbon materials is already full of ambiguities because of the existence of numerous carbon forms (including those with mixed hybridization), precursors and manufacturing processes. Any terminology that contributes to such confusions should therefore be avoided. Materials 2018, 11, 1857

5 of 21

polymers, even after initial coking [25]. Importantly, the nomenclature of carbon materials is already
full of ambiguities because of the existence of numerous carbon forms (including those with mixed
hybridization), precursors and manufacturing processes. Any terminology that contributes to such
confusions should therefore be avoided.

4.2. Graphitizing and Non-Graphitizing Carbon

Graphitizing carbons are those polymer-derived carbons that can potentially be converted into
polycrystalline graphite by heat treatment [34,71], catalytic processes [72], stress [73] or any other
method. Graphite features an ABABA crystal arrangement with a layer separation of 3.354 Å along
the c-axis. During initial pyrolysis stages, certain semi-crystalline polymers, such as PVC, convert
into a carbonaceous material that resembles stacked graphene fragments. Although initially these
fragments contain impurities and have a turbostratic arrangement (randomly rotated basal planes),
their progressive ordering at higher temperatures leads towards graphite formation [34,71]. Pyrolytic
graphite can be post-processed to yield Highly Oriented Pyrolytic Graphite (HOPG). HOPG can also
be obtained using other methods such as recrystallization from the iron melts (commercially known as
Kish graphite), or thermal compression of chemically deposited graphene [33].

Non-graphitizing carbons, by deﬁnition, cannot be converted into crystalline graphite, as they
contain various structural defects, and randomly oriented graphene fragments exhibiting a strong
three-dimensional (3D) bonding. These turbostratic graphene fragments feature a Gaussian distribution
in terms of size and shape, carbon-carbon bond-length and valance angles [74], and have an inter-layer
separation >0.335 nm [25]. The presence of defects causes these fragments to curl, fold and form
fullerene-like structures [75–77], and occasionally, completely closed buckminsterfullerenes [53].
The curved structures coexist with the larger, stacked graphene sheets [53]. Non-graphitizing carbons
exhibit a lower electrical conductivity but an improved hardness compared to graphite, and are also
called hard carbons. PF resins, cellulose, poly(vinylidene chloride), and certain polyimides yield
non-graphitizing carbon on pyrolysis.

4.3. Glassy and Activated Carbon

Non-graphitizing carbon with a high purity that has experienced at least some coking during
pyrolysis is known as glassy carbon. In the case of large (millimeter)-scale structures, glassy carbon
is obtained at >2000 ◦C, since the pyrolysis intermediates may display a poor thermal conductivity
causing a thermal gradient across the sample [78]. In order to systematically anneal out the volatiles
and ensure purity all the way to the center of the structure, these elevated temperatures are essential.
In some industrial processes, the preparation of glassy carbon is shown to take place at 1000 ◦C with
modiﬁed pyrolysis conditions for ≤3 mm structural dimensions [60]. It has been conﬁrmed by several
studies that in the case of micro/nano scale structures, the properties of glassy carbon can be achieved
at lower temperatures such as 900 ◦C (details in Sections 5–7), likely with some oxygen impurities.

Activated carbons are non-graphitizing carbons formed by direct charring that contain surface
radicals and open pores. They have heteroatoms and more defects compared to glassy carbon, and
their electrical conductivity and mechanical strength is typically lower. Owing to an active surface
chemistry, they are often used as adsorbants and catalytic beds.

4.4. Carbon Fibers

Micro and nano scale ﬁbers prepared by pyrolysis of cellulose, polyacrylonitrile (PAN), or other
polymer ﬁbers were traditionally not classiﬁed as glassy or activated based on the precursor
chemistry [79]. However, with TEM becoming a common characterization tool for carbon materials [80],
the microstructure of individual carbon ﬁbers is increasingly being probed, and they are often labeled
glassy, graphitic and graphitizing. As such, the annealing pattern in ﬁbers is signiﬁcantly different
from the bulk due to a high surface-to-volume ratio. Surface treatment, fabrication parameters, and
in the case of PAN, pre-pyrolysis oxidation can strongly inﬂuence their properties [79]. It has been

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

6 of 21

reported that ﬁbers tend to become more ordered (graphitic) if the fabrication process (typically
electrospinning [81]) is modiﬁed [27], additives are incorporated [82], or stress is introduced [83,84].
Carbon ﬁbers and solely ﬁber-based structures (e.g., tissue implants) are excluded from this review
due to the vastness of the ﬁeld.

5. Glassy Carbon Structures and Devices

As mentioned earlier, glassy carbon features closed porosity due to the presence of fullerene-like
structures [76,85], which renders it impermeable to most gases and liquids i.e., chemically inert. Its
defect-containing yet stable microstructure is resistant to crack propagation [86]. This property,
integrated with a good thermal conductivity, contributes to its high thermal shock resistance.
Other general properties of glassy carbon that are interesting from a manufacturing point of view are
listed in Table 1. Importantly, the given values are for commercially available (bulk-manufactured)
samples, which are typically mentioned in a range rather than as an absolute number, since glassy
carbon is not a unique material. For further details regarding the material supplier/grade etc.,
respective reference articles may be consulted.

Table 1. Properties of commercially available, bulk-manufactured glassy carbons.

Property

Young’s modulus

Poisson’s ratio

Density

Electrical resistivity

Thermal expansion coefﬁcient

Value

20–40 GPa

0.15–0.17

1.3–1.55 g/cm3
10–50 µΩm
(2.0–3.4) × 10−6 K−1

Apparent porosity

0–12%

Special Conditions, If
Applicable

-

-

-

At room temperature

-

-

Electrochemical potential limits
(stability window)

(a) 0.9 to −1.1 V

(b) 1.4 to −1.5 V

(c) 0.5 to −1.6 V

(d) 3.0 to −2.6 V

(a) in 1 M HCl

(b) in Phosphate buffer, pH 6

(c) in 1 M NaOH

(d) in 0.2 M LiClO4 in acetonitrile

Ref.

[87,88]

[87]

[38]

[38]

[25]

[38]

[89]

In addition to the experimental investigations, properties of glassy carbon under extreme
conditions have also been examined theoretically [85]. The mechanical strength of glassy carbon
is shown to further improve (at millimeter scale) by its artiﬁcial compression [90]. These properties,
combined with the possibility of molding the precursor polymer into any desirable shape have been
explored for a variety of applications. First, some large-scale applications are detailed, which served as
the motivation for micro/nano devices.

5.1. Large-Scale Applications of Glassy Carbon

Glassy carbon has enabled some paradigm shifting technologies such as the fabrication of camera
lenses [91] (used for glass molding), development of solid-state batteries (electrode material), and
scale-up of harsh chemical processes, such as the crystallization of CaF2, CdS and ZnS under extreme P,
T conditions (used as vessel liner) [25]. It is used in the manufacture of motor brushes, high temperature
furnace elements, and laboratory crucibles previously manufactured using platinum or quartz [25].
Owing to its biocompatibility and mechanical strength, glassy carbon is a recommended material
for the replacement of load-bearing joins in the human body [92], and has been studied as a dental
implant material [93,94]. Two major challenges associated with the large-scale production of glassy
carbon structures are: (i) high costs and (ii) dimensional shrinkage. The cost is directly related to the
high processing temperatures, expensive raw materials, and the limitations associated with forming

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

7 of 21

and molding the precursor resins [25]. The second issue, i.e., shrinkage, is inevitable since one must
remove all possible non-carbon atoms from the material in order to achieve the useable properties,
which leads to an overall mass loss. These challenges are addressed, and even turned into advantages
in micro-/nanomanufacturing as described below.

5.2. Glassy Carbon in Micro/Nano Manufacturing

There are two possible pathways for manufacturing micro/nano scale structures using glassy
carbon: (i) patterning a polymer followed by pyrolysis for its conversion into glassy carbon, or (ii) direct
patterning of glassy carbon in the micro/nano scale. Pathway (i) enables a wider range of shapes
without the need for machining, while pathway (ii) has the advantage of known material properties.

5.2.1. Fabrication via Pyrolysis of Polymer Structures

Lithographic techniques for patterning resins are well-studied, and are capable of sub-micron
fabrication [16]. When these patterns are pyrolyzed, dimensional shrinkage becomes a tool for further
size-reduction, which is otherwise beyond the capabilities of the employed fabrication technique.
The thus obtained nano-scale structures offer an enhanced sensitivity and durability, for example,
in biosensor applications. Due to a high surface-to-volume ratio of the individual structures, the volatile
pyrolysis byproducts are easily annealed out. It has been reported that the material gains a higher
crystallinity [27] and a much improved mechanical strength [14] at pyrolysis temperature as low as
900 ◦C at the nano scale. Selected examples of carbon devices fabricated using this approach from
the recent literature are compiled in Table 2. Note that, in some of these articles, the term glassy
carbon is not directly used, but the properties of the resulting material are shown to be very close to
glassy carbon.

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

8 of 21

Table 2. Glassy carbon structures for device applications obtained by pyrolysis of micro/nano patterned polymers (representative examples from 2013–2018).
Acronyms: IDEA: Interdigitated Electrode Array, NSC: Neural Stem Cell, MRI: Magnetic Resonance Imaging, RF: Resorcinol-Formaldehyde; AFM: Atomic Force
Microscopy, PAN: Polyacrylonitrile. Resists are mentioned as Tradenames.

S.No.

Structure/Device

Fabrication Technique

Precursor
Polymer/Resist

Proposed/Tested
Application

Neural sensing
Neural stimulation and
recording
Dielectrophoresis
DNA immobilization
Cell sensing

Supercapacitor

Photolithography

Photolithography

Photolithography
Photolithography
Photolithography

Photolithography

Microelectrode

Microelectrode

Microelectrode
Microelectrode
Microelectrode

Microelectrode

Microelectrode with
suspended nanowires
Microelectrode with
suspended nanowires

3D-IDEA

3D-IDEA

3D-IDEA

Electrode

Heavy metal ion detection

Photolithography

Gas sensing

Photolithography, electrospinning

Chemiresistive biosensor

Photolithography, electrospinning

Dopamine sensing (in the
presence of ascorbic acid)

Photolithography

Dielectrophoresis

Photolithography

Micropillar array

Cell culture (NSCs)

Cholesterol sensor

Photolithography

Photolithography

Porous 3D scaffold

Cell culture (NSCs)

Chemical synthesis, cryogenation

Various cell culture
substrates
Conical nano-tips
Truss
Micro/nanopillar array

Cell culture (neuroblastoma
and Schwann cells)
AFM
-
-

Nanoporous thin ﬁlms

Molecular sieving

Two-photon lithography
Two-photon lithography
Photo-nanoimprint lithography
Chemical process (dissolution and
acetone followed by ﬁlm
deposition)

Photolithography, electrospinning

RF-gel, SU-8, PAN

SU-8

SU-8

SU-8
SU-8
SU-8

SU-8

SU-8

SU-8

SU-8

SU-8

SU-8

SU-8

SU-8
Chitosan, Agarose,
Gelatin

IP-series resists
IP-series resists
AR-UL-01

Remarks, If Any

Flexible device

Flexible device

3D electrodes
λ-DNA bridge between electrodes
Impedance based cell sensing
Rapid pyrolysis, bubble containing
glassy carbon
Millimeter-scale thin-ﬁlm
electrodes

Ref.

[95]

[96,97]

[98]
[99]
[100]

[55]

[101]

Device not tested for gas sensing

[102]

DNA immobilization on carbon
nanowire

[103]

Redox ampliﬁcation of dopamine

[104]

Bacterial analysis, microﬂuidic
device
IDEAs decorated with gold
nanoparticles
-
Use of MRI for non-invasive
characterization
Study of cell growth and
differentiation
Tips printed on silicon cantilevers
Mechanical property evaluation
-

Polyfurfuryl alcohol

-

[105,106]

[107]

[108]

[109]

[110]

[21]
[14,111]
[16]

[112,113]

[114]

[115]

Inverted microdome

Glass molding

Soft lithography

Furan resin

Master for soft lithography
prepared in SU-8

Inverted microﬂuidic
channels

Glass molding

Soft lithography

Furan resin

Microﬂuidic chip fabrication

1

2

3
4
5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16
17
18

19

20

21

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

9 of 21

As evidenced by Table 2, the most common material for obtaining micro/nano glassy carbon
structures is SU-8 (commercial product from MicroChem, MA, USA). SU-8 is a PF resin (Novolac
type), which is extensively used in microfabrication [116], and is typically patterned using standard
UV-(photo)lithography for the purpose of carbonization (see entries 1 to 13 in Table 2). UV-lithography
is a relatively inexpensive batch fabrication technique [12] that can be optimized to yield <5 µm critical
dimensions [104,108]. For large-area patterning of nano-scale structures, photo-nanoimprint lithography [16]
is more suitable. This technique can potentially be utilized for obtaining a variety of structured glassy
carbon surfaces. SU-8 is also compatible with 3D patterning such as by two-photon lithography [117]
and single-photon-multi-layer-interference lithography [118]. However, to my knowledge, carbonization
of truly 3D (not 2.5D) SU-8 structures has not been reported. Other polymers used in carbon-based
microfarication include IP-resists (commercial product from Nanoscribe GmbH, Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen,
Germany) [14,21,111] and various furan resins [112–115]. Furan resins and polyfurfuryl alcohols are
polymers containing the basic furan ring structure [119] that are available in a wide range of viscosities
(100 to 300000 centipoise [119]), and have been conventionally used for glassy carbon production. Yet, there
are only a few examples of their use in small scale devices, likely due to the fact that they are commonly
processed using soft-lithography [114,115] or molding, and entail more processing steps compared to
photo-patterning. Microfabrication with furan resins has a lot of scope for further development.

Two major drawbacks of pyrolyzing the substrate-bound, pre-patterned structures for device
purposes are (i) non-uniform structural shrinkage and (ii) lack of control over the substrate-carbon
interface, occasionally leading to poor adhesion or pattern collapse. After carbonization, the material
at the base (footprint) of the structure displays much less xy-shrinkage compared to the upper regions.
While this effect can be neglected for high-aspect ratio structures, one may end-up with slanted walls as
the shape becomes more 2D. Various parameters including the intended geometry, pyrolysis conditions
and polymer viscosity inﬂuence the pyrolytic shrinkage [120].

Good adhesion onto the substrate is crucial for structures that are expected to experience
mechanical or ﬂuidic impact during subsequent operation (e.g., glass molding tools [114,115],
microﬂuidic components [105,106] etc.).
It can be improved by using adhesion promoters prior
to lithography, optimizing the aspect ratio of the structure, and factoring-in the anticipated shrinkage.
Direct machining of glassy carbon bypasses the two aforementioned limitations.

5.2.2. Fabrication via Direct Patterning of Glassy Carbon

Representative examples of the direct patterning of glassy carbon are listed in Table 3.
Glassy carbon is a hard and brittle material. Therefore, its direct machining using conventional
tools is extremely difﬁcult. However, FIB milling [30] and various dry [31] and wet [28] etching
methods have been effectively used to pattern it. Its exceptional inertness makes the chemical (wet)
etching challenging, but an electrochemically assisted wet etch is generally possible [28], since glassy
carbon does exhibit an electrochemical corrosion [121]. Dry etching is often carried out with the aid of
reactive ions and/or high-density plasma. FIB milling is an expensive technique for patterning glassy
carbon, but one can achieve a critical dimension of 5–10 µm using FIB. Such structures can be used as
a master mold in the subsequent fabrication.

The main challenge associated with direct patterning methods is the resulting surface
roughness [122,123]. While glassy carbon surface is characteristically smooth, machining-induced
stresses can render it uneven due to its brittleness. Electrochemical wet etching of glassy carbon is
capable of yielding submicron features, but its isotropic nature leads to undercuts [123]. Moreover, in
the case of etching, regions with a higher crystallinity may have a different etch rate compared to those
with defects and imperfections [55]. Laser ablation of glassy carbon suffers from reﬂections, and the
heat generated during the process can potentially lead to altered surface properties [31]. In order to
resolve some of these issues, oxidation assisted electrochemical machining [124] has been recently
proposed. In this technique, an oxide layer is electrochemically formed (and regenerated) on the
surface during its machining, which partly prevents it from getting damaged.

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

10 of 21

Table 3. Devices and structures manufactured by direct patterning of glassy carbon in the micro/nano scale with their applications. Acronyms: RIE: Reactive Ion Etch,
FIB: Focused Ion Beam, HOPG: Highly Oriented Pyrolytic Graphite.

S.No.

Structure

1
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Microtip array
Microtip array

Test patterns

Test patterns (mold for
imprinting)
Test patterns (mold for
imprinting)
Test patterns (mold for
imprinting)
Test patterns (mold for
imprinting)

Microﬂuidic channels

Various nanoscale
structures

Proposed/Tested
Application

Field emission cathode
Field emission cathode

Fuel cell electrode

Glass molding for diffractive
optical element fabrication
Glass molding for diffractive
optical element fabrication

Patterning Technique

Remarks

Thermochemical etching
Laser machining
Laser machining, reactive
ion etching

RIE, ion beam etching

Inductively Coupled
Plasma-RIE

Starting material: SU2000 glassy carbon
Starting material: SU2000 glassy carbon

Comparison/combination of techniques

RIE under various conditions, comparison of
techniques

Ti mask used during RIE

Hot embossing of glass

Dicing, laser machining

Starting material: Calcined GC20

Hot embossing/thermal
imprinting of glass

FIB milling

Fabrication of microﬂuidics parts

Ref.

[29,122]
[125]

[31,126]

[127]

[128]

[129]

[30]

Electrospray mass
spectrometry

Electrochemical etching
(Anodic in 0.1 M NaOH)
Electrochemical etching
(Anodic in 0.1 M NaOH)

-

Oxygen plasma etching

Starting material: photoresist pyrolyzed at 1000 ◦C

[28,123]

Starting material: photoresist pyrolyzed at 1000 ◦C

[130]

Hole-mask colloidal lithography used for masking
glassy carbon substrate, comparison of glassy
carbon and HOPG etch rates

[131]

Test patterns

Electrodes

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

11 of 21

From Tables 2 and 3, it is evident that electrode fabrication is one of the most common applications
of glassy carbon, which has been extended to some fascinating research topics, such as neural
stimulation and recording [95–97] and cell separation on microﬂuidic platforms [105,106]. These
applications also beneﬁt from glassy carbon’s biocompatibility, which is substantiated by successful
cell culture on glassy carbon platforms [108–110].

6. Surface Modiﬁcation of Glassy Carbon Electrodes

Electrodes entail a complete wetting by the electrolyte facilitated by an active surface. Electrode
activation can be performed by mechanical polishing, washing, plasma treatment, thermal and
laser activation, ultrasonication, and possibly by other methods [132]. This clean and activated
electrode is either directly tested, or is subject to further chemical functionalization or electrochemical
pretreatment [89,133] prior to its use. This involves an intentional grafting of radicals (e.g., NH4+ [134])
or electroactive species (e.g., hydroquinone [135]) speciﬁc to the desired application. The surface
treatment can be taken one step further by ‘decorating’ the electrodes with other functional materials
(e.g., nanoparticles [136], nanotubes [137], other nanocarbon units [138], and their composites [139]),
which has been widely performed on glassy carbon. This is an indirect method of using glassy carbon
in nano-scale devices, which has led to the development of a variety of electrochemical nano/bio
sensors. A detailed analysis of the mechanism of various functionalization pathways can be found in a
comprehensive review by McCreery [140].

Catalytic nanoparticles (gold, silver, metal oxides etc.), other carbon nanoforms and
their composites may signiﬁcantly improve the electrocatalytic performance of glassy carbon
electrodes [141–143]. On the other hand, these nanomaterials beneﬁt from glassy carbon’s high
electrochemical and thermal stability [144], enhanced surface area [136], and corrosion resistance.
Substrate support improves the available surface area of the nanomaterials, which facilitates a greater
mass transport that is of paramount interest in catalysis [145]. Nanoparticles on carbon surfaces are
either obtained by reducing metals from their respective salts, or by attaching pre-formed nanoparticles.
The adhesion of particles is considerably better in the case of salt reduction, however, pre-synthesized
particles allow for a better control over their geometry and other physicochemical properties [146].
Modiﬁed electrodes are frequently coated with ionic polymers (e.g., naﬁonTM) to partially block the
neutral molecules from reaching the functional element [147].

Selected examples of glassy carbon electrode modiﬁcation via decoration with other materials are
listed in Table 4. The modifying agents are divided into four categories for convenience, and only ﬁve
examples from each are provided, since the idea here is to present surface modiﬁcation as a possibility
for further sensitivity improvement of miniaturized glassy carbon devices (one such example [107] is
listed in Table 2). Notably, in the case of multilayer or composite material coatings, the exact mechanism
of the electrocatalytic activity as well as the contribution from glassy carbon itself is occasionally not
completely understood. The overall electrode performance, however, is shown to enhance. It is also
worth mentioning that the boundaries between surface activation, functionalization, modiﬁcation and
decoration are difﬁcult to set, since every treatment does modify the surface to some extent.

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

12 of 21

Table 4. Glassy carbon electrodes decorated with functional nanomaterials and their complex mixtures for sensing applications (selected examples from 2013–2018).
Acronyms: LOD: Limit of Detection; MWCNT: Multiwalled Carbon Nanotube.

Modiﬁer Type

s
y
o
l
l
a
d
n
a

s
l
a
t
e
M

s
e
d
i
x
o
l
a
t
e
M

s

m
r
o
f
n
o
b
r
a
c

r
e
h
t
O

s
e
r
u
t
x
i
m
d
n
a
s
e
t
i
s
o
p
m
o
C

Modiﬁer Name

Gold nanoparticles

Detected Species

Special Features

Glucose

Non-enzymatic sensor with a high selectivity; LOD: 0.05 mM

Gold-Ruthenium nanoparticles

Indol-3-Carbaldehyde

Detection in the 20–100 µM range; comparison of measurements at
different temperatures

Silver nanoparticle

Copper nanoparticles

Ni/NiCu alloy ﬁlms

Heavy metal ions

Hydrogen peroxide

Hg+ detected in picomolar concentration

Electrodes coated with a thin NaﬁonTM layer, LOD: 3.45 µM

Mefenamic acid (in Contraﬂam †)

Electrochemically deposited Ni/NiCu ﬁlms.

Indium-Tin oxide nanoparticles

Sulﬁdes

Iron oxide (Magnetite and hematite) nanoparticles

Acetaminophen †

SiO2 nanoparticles

LaCoO3 nanostructures

Zinc oxide nanoparticles

Fullerene

Multi-walled CNTs

Graphene oxide

Tryptophan †

Ceﬁtizoxime †

Valganciclovirn †

Nitrobenzene

Diamond nanoparticles

Guanine and adenine

Selective detection of sulﬁdes in the presence of elemental Sulphur in
alcoholic medium, LOD: 0.3 µM

Comparison of electrocatalytic activity of glassy carbon electrodes with and
without modiﬁcation
Detection in real samples, LOD: 5.0 × 10–8 mol L–1

Highly selective determination of Ceﬁtizoxime in a solubilized system; LOD:
0.27 ng/mL
LOD: 1.52 × 10−9 M (detection in dosage forms), high selectivity

Comparison of various electrochemical measurement methods. LOD: 66 nM
by Cyclic voltammetry.

Deposition of functionalized diamond nanoparticles embedded in Chitosan;
LOD: 2 nM (guanine) and 10 nM (adenine).

Dopamine, ascorbic acid, uric acid

Simultaneous detection of all species

Caffeine

Electrochemical detection of Caffeine in tea/coffee samples; LOD: 0.038 µM

Nitrogen doped carbon

Caffeic acid in red wines

Use of ﬂame synthesis for preparing N doped carbon; LOD: 0.0024 µM

Palladium/fullerene

Methane

Electrodeposition of Pd NPs on fullerene ﬁlms; electrode activity tested at
different temperatures

Platinum-gold bimetallic nanoclusters/reduced
Graphene oxide

Silver nanoparticles/metal–organic
framework composite
Various carbon nanoforms, with and without Li+ ions

Metal oxides nanoparticles doped phthalocyanine and
functionalized MWCNTs

Hydrogen peroxide

Nano molar concentrations detected

Tryptophan †

Metal–organic framework MIL-101(Fe) modiﬁed with silver nanoparticles
coated onto the electrode; LOD: 0.14 µM

Heavy metal ions

Comparative study of different modiﬁcation pathways

Dopamine

(MWCNT/Metal Oxide/Phthalocyanine) solution drop casted onto polished
electrode; LOD: 0.75 µM

† Pharmaceutical products.

Ref.

[136]

[148]

[149]

[150]

[151]

[141]

[152]

[153]

[154]

[155]

[156]

[137]

[157]

[158]

[159]

[144]

[160]

[161]

[162]

[163]

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

13 of 21

7. Characterization of Glassy Carbon

Ensuring that a polymer-derived carbon with an unknown pyrolysis mechanism is glassy carbon
is tricky, especially in the micro/nano scale where the ﬁrst hand visual and physical observations
(e.g., glass-like shine) are difﬁcult. Most of the established characterization techniques have speciﬁc
sample requirements (powders, ultra-thin slices, specialized substrates etc.).
In order to satisfy
them, one may end up preparing structures of different geometries and surface area compared to
what is actually used in the device. Since the annealing mechanism is critical in determining the
material purity and porosity [53,60], it is likely to ﬁnd microstructural variations caused by the sample
geometry. To avoid this, one should utilize the techniques that are designed to analyze micro/nano
structures where possible, or modify the sample geometry in a way that is not too far from the
original. For example, elemental purity can be determined using Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX)
spectroscopy [121], rather than by combustion analysis; or Raman spectroscopy can be performed on
an array of microfabricated structures rather than the powder obtained from the same polymer. It is
not straightforward to determine whether or not a polymer experiences coking at the micro/nano
length scales. One option is to intentionally design a structure that will experience a non-uniform
shrinkage during pyrolysis. If it shows bending, twisting or stretching rather than fracturing, this
conﬁrms that during the initial pyrolysis stages the material had some viscoelasticity. Importantly,
after cooling down, the material becomes hard and brittle in all cases.

Broadly, there are three major aspects of the characterization of polymer-derived carbon:
(i) microstructure (to differentiate between graphitizing and non-graphitizing), (ii) surface chemistry
and porosity (to establish if it is glassy or activated), and (iii) physicochemical properties (mechanical,
electrical, electrochemical) to further narrow down the carbon class. Additionally, elemental purity
entails validation in speciﬁc cases (for example, when pyrolysis conditions are modiﬁed). Commonly
used microstructural characterization techniques include XRD [74,164], Raman spectroscopy [164],
TEM (preferably low-voltage [53]; can be integrated with Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy or
EELS [165]) and certain physicochemical properties (e.g., electrical conductivity). Surface ﬂatness
is generally observed by SEM or AFM measurements, and the chemical nature of the surface is
investigated using contact angle measurements (ﬁrst approximation), and by XPS (detailed surface
functional group analysis). Pyrolysis mechanism can be probed using Electron Paramagnetic
Resonance [33,52], and the graphitization can be substantiated with magnetoresistance evaluation [38]
where possible. All aforementioned techniques complement each other, and may not provide sufﬁcient
data as standalone. Further property tests are application-speciﬁc.

8. Further Discussion Points

8.1. Should the Term ‘Glass-Like Carbon’ Be Used Instead of ‘Glassy Carbon’?

According to the IUPAC nomenclature [166], ‘glassy’ and ‘vitreous’ carbon should not be used to
denote this material since these terms (i) have been used as trademarks and (ii) give the impression
that the material properties are similar to those of amorphous glasses (e.g., silicates), which is
incorrect. Despite this recommendation, several pioneering publications and fundamental books
used by students and early career researchers contain the term glassy carbon. Subsequently, it is
reﬂected in the Internet search, and is listed as a keyword various publications. Although this is an
open question and the choice of the appropriate term is left to the authors, the term glassy carbon is
used in this article simply to ensure its wider dissemination.

8.2. Is 900 ◦C a High Enough Temperature to Obtain Glassy Carbon?

One common criticism faced by microsystem engineers is that the carbon obtained below 2000 ◦C
may contain oxygen, and hence, should not be called glassy carbon. Here it is essential to understand
that lithographic patterning of polymers entails a substrate, which is typically silicon. The melting
point of silicon is 1410 ◦C however, it may experience thermal fatigue and deform at slightly lower

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

14 of 21

temperatures [167]. Consequently, 900–1200 ◦C is chosen as the optimum carbonization temperature
range for lithography-based devices. It has been frequently reported that the micro/nano carbon
structures pyrolyzed at 900 ◦C feature properties similar to commercial glassy carbons, which is
attributed to the high surface-to-volume ratio of the smaller structures that allows them to attain
a low porosity and higher purity compared to larger structures at the same temperature. Oxygen
impurities, however, are plausible. The exact correlation between structure size, pyrolysis temperature
and material properties is a topic for further investigation. A potential solution is to mention the
pyrolysis temperature in the label (e.g., glassy carbon-900) in order to avoid ambiguities.

9. Conclusions

There are vast global interests in carbon nanomaterials as well as in promoting commercially viable
micro- and nanomanufacturing processes. Glassy carbon is an ideal material for this purpose because:
(i) it is composed of a stable, percolated graphenic network, is corrosion-free, and hence, remarkably
durable at the nano-scale, (ii) it is an elemental carbon form that offers multiple advantages over
composites, principally, the availability of all physicochemical properties of the pristine form, (iii) 2.5-
and 3D structures can be batch-fabricated by lithographic techniques, (iv) micro-scale techniques can be
employed in nanomanufacturing due to the pyrolysis-induced size reduction, and (v) numerous surface
modification opportunities without compromising the material properties can be availed. The established
large-scale applications of glassy carbon have already proven its commercial viability. Further cost
reduction is possible by lowering the required pyrolysis temperature by introducing additives and
catalysts in the precursor polymers, development of high performance resins at lower costs, and by
moving from batch to continuous manufacturing. There is a substantial scope in the development
of direct patterning methods for glassy carbon, for example, by customized etching methods and the
use of high-intensity ion and laser beams as direct-writing tools. Owing to its compatibility with 3D
microfabrication, this material can potentially be used in a variety of high-aspect ratio devices.

Author Contributions: All contents of this article are prepared by S.S.

Funding: Author thanks the Ministry of Science, Research and Arts, Baden-Württemberg, Germany (Grant
No. Az:33-7533-30-20/3/3, HEiKA Center FunTECH-3D); and project BioPEC, jointly supported by the Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), Germany (Ref. No. 01DQ17014) and the Department of Biotechnology
(DBT), India (Ref. No. BT/IN/BMBF-Germany/29/SKM/2016-17) for ﬁnancial support.

Acknowledgments: Author sincerely thanks Aakanksha Khurana and Akhilesh Sharma, Punjab Engineering
College, Chandigarh, India (supported by PEBA at KIT; www.peba.kit.edu) for help in literature survey. Author
also expresses gratitude to the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and Open Access Publishing Fund of the
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.

González-García, P. Activated carbon from lignocellulosics precursors: A review of the synthesis methods,
characterization techniques and applications. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018, 82, 1393–1414. [CrossRef]

2. Haddon, R.C. pi.-Electrons in three dimensions. Acc. Chem. Res. 1988, 21, 243–249. [CrossRef]
3. Haddon, R.C.; Palmer, R.E.; Kroto, H.W.; Sermon, P.A. The Fullerenes: Powerful Carbon-Based Electron

4.

5.

6.

7.

Acceptors. Philos. Trans. Phys. Sci. Eng. 1993, 343, 53–62.
Zhu, Z. An Overview of Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene for Biosensing Applications. Nano-Micro Lett.
2017, 9. [CrossRef]
Chae, S.H.; Lee, Y.H. Carbon nanotubes and graphene towards soft electronics. Nano Converg. 2014, 1.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sun, D.M.; Liu, C.; Ren, W.C.; Cheng, H.M. A Review of Carbon Nanotube- and Graphene-Based Flexible
Thin-Film Transistors. Small 2013, 9, 1188–1205. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Bandodkar, A.J.; Jeerapan, I.; You, J.-M.; Nuñez-Flores, R.; Wang, J. Highly Stretchable Fully-Printed
CNT-Based Electrochemical Sensors and Biofuel Cells: Combining Intrinsic and Design-Induced
Stretchability. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 721–727. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

15 of 21

8.

Kholghi Eshkalak, S.; Chinnappan, A.; Jayathilaka, W.A.D.M.; Khatibzadeh, M.; Kowsari, E.; Ramakrishna, S.
A review on inkjet printing of CNT composites for smart applications. Appl. Mater. Today 2017, 9, 372–386.
[CrossRef]

9. Njuguna, J.; Pielichowski, K.; Zhu, H. (Eds.) Health and Environmental Safety of Nanomaterials: Polymer
Nanocomposites and Other Materials Containing Nanoparticles; Woodhead Publishing Series in Composites
Science and Engineering; Woodhead Publishing: Cambridge, UK; Waltham, MA, USA, 2014; ISBN
978-0-85709-655-5.

10. Rammohan, A.; Sharma, A. Carbon as a MEMS Material. In Materials and Failures in MEMS and NEMS;
Tiwari, A., Raj, B., Eds.; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2015; pp. 1–20. ISBN 978-1-119-08388-7.
11. Madou, M.J.; Perez-Gonzalez, V.H.; Pramanick, B. (Eds.) Carbon, the Next Silicon; Momentum Press:

12.

13.

New York, NY, USA, 2016; ISBN 978-1-60650-883-1.
Sharma, S.; Madou, M. Micro and nano patterning of carbon electrodes for bioMEMS. Bioinspired Biomim.
Nanobiomater. 2012, 1, 252–265. [CrossRef]
Sekkat, Z.; Kawata, S. Laser nanofabrication in photoresists and azopolymers: Laser nanofabrication in
photoresists and azopolymers. Laser Photonics Rev. 2014, 8, 1–26. [CrossRef]

14. Bauer, J.; Schroer, A.; Schwaiger, R.; Kraft, O. Approaching theoretical strength in glassy carbon nanolattices.

Nat. Mater. 2016, 15, 438–443. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

15. Cadarso, V.J.; Chidambaram, N.; Jacot-Descombes, L.; Schift, H. High-aspect-ratio nanoimprint process

chains. Microsyst. Nanoeng. 2017, 3, 17017. [CrossRef]

16. Penmatsa, V.; Kawarada, H.; Wang, C. Fabrication of carbon nanostructures using photo-nanoimprint

lithography and pyrolysis. J. Micromech. Microeng. 2012, 22, 045024. [CrossRef]

17. Maldonado, J.R.; Peckerar, M. X-ray lithography: Some history, current status and future prospects.

Microelectron. Eng. 2016, 161, 87–93. [CrossRef]

18. Reichmanis, E.; Houlihan, F.M.; Nalamasu, O.; Neenan, T.X. Chemical Ampliﬁcation Mechanisms for
Microlithography. In Polymers for Microelectronics; Thompson, L.F., Willson, C.G., Tagawa, S., Eds.; American
Chemical Society: Washington, DC, USA, 1993; Volume 537, pp. 2–24. ISBN 978-0-8412-2721-7.

19. Vilˇcáková, J.; Kutˇejová, L.; Jurˇca, M.; Mouˇcka, R.; Vícha, R.; Sedlaˇcík, M.; Kovalcik, A.; Machovský, M.;
Kazantseva, N. Enhanced Charpy impact strength of epoxy resin modiﬁed with vinyl-terminated
polydimethylsiloxane: Research Article. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2018, 135, 45720. [CrossRef]

20. Anthony, R.; Laforge, E.; Casey, D.P.; Rohan, J.F.; O’Mathuna, C. High-aspect-ratio photoresist processing for
fabrication of high resolution and thick micro-windings. J. Micromech. Microeng. 2016, 26, 105012. [CrossRef]
21. Zakhurdaeva, A.; Dietrich, P.-I.; Hölscher, H.; Koos, C.; Korvink, J.; Sharma, S. Custom-Designed Glassy

Carbon Tips for Atomic Force Microscopy. Micromachines 2017, 8, 285. [CrossRef]

22. Lin, Q. Properties of Photoresist Polymers. In Physical Properties of Polymers Handbook; Mark, J.E., Ed.;

Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2007; pp. 965–979. ISBN 978-0-387-31235-4.

23. Mojarad, N.; Gobrecht, J.; Ekinci, Y. Beyond EUV lithography: A comparative study of efﬁcient photoresists’

performance. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 9235. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

24. Chiang, D.; Chang, C.-M.; Chen, S.-W.; Yang, C.-T.; Hsueh, W.-J. Physical properties of an oxide photoresist

25.

ﬁlm for submicron pattern lithography. Thin Solid Films 2013, 542, 409–414. [CrossRef]
Jenkins, G.M.; Kawamura, K. Polymeric Carbons–Carbon Fibre, Glass and Char; Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, UK; New York, NY, USA, 1976; ISBN 0-521-20693-8.

26. Lehrle, R.S. Polymer pyrolysis mechanisms: Experimental approaches for investigating them. J. Anal.

27.

Appl. Pyrolysis 1987, 11, 55–64. [CrossRef]
Sharma, S.; Sharma, A.; Cho, Y.-K.; Madou, M. Increased Graphitization in Electrospun Single Suspended
Carbon Nanowires Integrated with Carbon-MEMS and Carbon-NEMS Platforms. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2012, 4, 34–39. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

28. Kiema, G.K.; Ssenyange, S.; McDermott, M.T. Microfabrication of Glassy Carbon by Electrochemical Etching.

J. Electrochem. Soc. 2004, 151, C142. [CrossRef]

29. Pleshkova, L.S.; Shesterkin, V.I. Effect of the glassy carbon structure on the aspect ratio of micropoints of matrix
field-emission cathodes prepared by thermochemical etching. Tech. Phys. 2016, 61, 1747–1750. [CrossRef]
30. Youn, S.W.; Takahashi, M.; Goto, H.; Maeda, R. A study on focused ion beam milling of glassy carbon molds
for the thermal imprinting of quartz and borosilicate glasses. J. Micromech. Microeng. 2006, 16, 2576–2584.
[CrossRef]

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

16 of 21

31. Kuhnke, M.; Lippert, T.; Ortelli, E.; Scherer, G.; Wokaun, A. Microstructuring of glassy carbon: Comparison

of laser machining and reactive ion etching. Thin Solid Films 2004, 453–454, 36–41. [CrossRef]

32. Walker, P.L. Chemistry and Physics of Carbon: A Series of Advances; Marcel Dekker, Inc.: New York, NY, USA,

1965; Volume 1.

33. Walker, P.L.; Thrower, P.A. Chemistry and Physics of Carbon: A Series of Advances; Marcel Dekker, Inc.: New York,

34.

NY, USA; Basel, Switzerland, 1975; Volume 12, ISBN 978-0-8247-6304-6.
Franklin, R.E. Crystallite Growth in Graphitizing and Non-Graphitizing Carbons. Proc. R. Soc. A Math. Phys.
Eng. Sci. 1951, 209, 196–218. [CrossRef]
Jenkins, G.M.; Kawamura, K. Structure of Glassy Carbon. Nature 1971, 231, 175–176. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

35.
36. Pesin, L.; Baitinger, E. A new structural model of glass-like carbon. Carbon 2002, 40, 295–306. [CrossRef]
37. Presland, A.E.B.; Walker, P.L. Growth of single-crystal graphite by pyrolysis of acetylene over metals. Carbon

1969, 7, 1–8. [CrossRef]

38. Walker, P.L. Chemistry and Physics of Carbon: A Series of Advances; Marcel Dekker, Inc.: New York, NY, USA;

Basel, Switzerland, 1981; Volume 16, ISBN 978-0-8247-6991-8.

39. Chaala, A.; Roy, C. Production of coke from scrap tire vacuum pyrolysis oil. Fuel Process. Technol. 1996, 46,

227–239. [CrossRef]

40. Martínez-Escandell, M.; Torregrosa, P.; Marsh, H.; Rodríguez-Reinoso, F.; Santamaría-Ramírez, R.;
Gómez-De-Salazar, C.; Romero-Palazón, E. Pyrolysis of petroleum residues: I. Yields and product analyses.
Carbon 1999, 37, 1567–1582. [CrossRef]

41. Zádor, J.; Fellows, M.D.; Miller, J.A. Initiation Reactions in Acetylene Pyrolysis. J. Phys. Chem. A 2017, 121,

4203–4217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

42. Amirov, R.K.; Atamanuk, I.N.; Vorobieva, N.A.; Isakaev, E.H.; Shavelkina, M.B.; Shkolnikov, E.I. Synthesis
of graphene-like materials by pyrolysis of hydrocarbons in thermal plasma and their properties. J. Phys.
Conf. Ser. 2015, 653, 012161. [CrossRef]

43. Zhang, Y.; Zhang, L.; Zhou, C. Review of Chemical Vapor Deposition of Graphene and Related Applications.

Acc. Chem. Res. 2013, 46, 2329–2339. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

44. Wang, S.; Luo, Z. Pyrolysis of Biomass; GREEN Alternative Energy Resources; De Gruyter; Science Press:

Beijing, China, 2017; ISBN 978-3-11-037457-5.

45. Tudu, K.; Murugan, S.; Patel, S.K. Light Oil Fractions from a Pyrolysis Plant—An Option for Energy Use.

46.

Energy Procedia 2014, 54, 615–626. [CrossRef]
Sahota, S.; Shah, G.; Ghosh, P.; Kapoor, R.; Sengupta, S.; Singh, P.; Vijay, V.; Sahay, A.; Vijay, V.K.; Thakur, I.S.
Review of trends in biogas upgradation technologies and future perspectives. Bioresour. Technol. Rep. 2018, 1,
79–88. [CrossRef]

47. Brugner, F.; Jonnatti, A. An Air Pyrolysis Study of Cast Bisphenol a Epoxy Transformer Coils. IEEE Trans.

Power Appar. Syst. 1983, PAS-102, 2203–2207. [CrossRef]

48. Kantarelis, E.; Yang, W.; Blasiak, W. Production of Liquid Feedstock from Biomass via Steam Pyrolysis in a

Fluidized Bed Reactor. Energy Fuels 2013, 27, 4748–4759. [CrossRef]

49. Gupta, C.K. Chemical Metallurgy; Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA: Weinheim, Germany, 2003; ISBN

978-3-527-30376-2.

50. Dunn, J.G.; Chamberlain, A.C. The recovery of gold from refractory arsenopyrite concentrates by

pyrolysis-oxidation. Miner. Eng. 1997, 10, 919–928. [CrossRef]

51. Hoffman, W.P.; Vastola, F.J.; Walker, P.L. Pyrolysis of propylene over carbon active sites II. Pyrolysis products.

52.

53.

Carbon 1988, 26, 485–499. [CrossRef]
Sharma, S.; Rostas, A.M.; Bordonali, L.; MacKinnon, N.; Weber, S.; Korvink, J.G. Micro and nano patternable
magnetic carbon. J. Appl. Phys. 2016, 120, 235107. [CrossRef]
Sharma, S.; Kumar, C.N.S.; Korvink, J.G.; Kübel, C. Evolution of Glassy Carbon Microstructure: In Situ
Transmission Electron Microscopy of the Pyrolysis Process. arXiv, 2018; arXiv:1801.01785.

54. Bennett, A.; Payne, D.R.; Court, R.W. Pyrolytic and Elemental Analysis of Decomposition Products from a

55.

Phenolic Resin. Macromol. Symp. 2014, 339, 38–47. [CrossRef]
Sharma, S.; Kamath, R.; Madou, M. Porous glassy carbon formed by rapid pyrolysis of phenol-formaldehyde
J. Anal.
resins and its performance as electrode material for electrochemical double layer capacitors.
Appl. Pyrolysis 2014, 108, 12–18. [CrossRef]

56. Pesin, L. Review: Structure and properties of glass-like carbon. J. Mater. Sci. 2002, 37, 1–28. [CrossRef]

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

17 of 21

57. Brooks, J.D.; Taylor, G.H. The formation of graphitizing carbons from the liquid phase. Carbon 1965, 3,

185–193. [CrossRef]

58. Lédé, J. Cellulose pyrolysis kinetics: An historical review on the existence and role of intermediate active

cellulose. J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis 2012, 94, 17–32. [CrossRef]

59. Edstrom, T.; Lewis, I.C. Chemical structure and graphitization: X-ray diffraction studies of graphites derived

from polynuclear aromatics. Carbon 1969, 7, 85–91. [CrossRef]

60. Maleki, H.; Holland, L.R.; Jenkins, G.M.; Zimmerman, R.L. Determining the shortest production time for

61.

glassy carbon ware. Carbon 1997, 35, 227–234. [CrossRef]
Fitzer, E.; Schäfer, W. The effect of crosslinking on the formation of glasslike carbons from thermosetting
resins. Carbon 1970, 8, 353–364. [CrossRef]

62. Desai, T.G.; Lawson, J.W.; Keblinski, P. Modeling initial stage of phenolic pyrolysis: Graphitic precursor

formation and interfacial effects. Polymer 2011, 52, 577–585. [CrossRef]

63. Liu, J.; Guo, X. ReaxFF molecular dynamics simulation of pyrolysis and combustion of pyridine. Fuel Process.

Technol. 2017, 161, 107–115. [CrossRef]

64. Kruse, T.M.; Wong, H.-W.; Broadbelt, L.J. Mechanistic Modeling of Polymer Pyrolysis: Polypropylene.

65.

Macromolecules 2003, 36, 9594–9607. [CrossRef]
Sharma, S. Microstructural Tuning of Glassy Carbon for Electrical and Electrochemical Sensor Applications;
University of California: Irvine, CA, USA, 2013; ISBN 978-1-303-60368-6.

66. Biryukova, G.P.; Shablygin, M.V.; Mikhailov, N.V.; Andrianov, K.A. Relationship between the conditions of
pyrolysis and the structural and chemical transformation of cellulose hydrate. Polym. Sci. USSR 1973, 15,
1762–1766. [CrossRef]

67. Obeid, F.; Janajreh, I. High Density Polyethylene Pyrolysis: Review and Progress. In ICREGA’14—Renewable
Energy: Generation and Applications; Hamdan, M.O., Hejase, H.A.N., Noura, H.M., Fardoun, A.A., Eds.;
Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2014; pp. 585–595. ISBN 978-3-319-05707-1.
Stein, S.E. Thermochemical kinetics of anthracene pyrolysis. Carbon 1981, 19, 421–429. [CrossRef]

68.
69. Maduskar, S.; Maliekkal, V.; Neurock, M.; Dauenhauer, P.J. On the Yield of Levoglucosan from Cellulose

Pyrolysis. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2018, 6, 7017–7025. [CrossRef]

70. Lewellen, P.C.; Peters, W.A.; Howard, J.B. Cellulose pyrolysis kinetics and char formation mechanism.

Symp. Int. Combust. 1977, 16, 1471–1480. [CrossRef]

71. Walker, P.L.; Thrower, P.A. Chemistry and Physics of Carbon: A Series of Advances; Marcel Dekker, Inc.: New York,

NY, USA, 1973; Volume 10, ISBN 978-0-8247-6072-4.

72. Hirano, S.-I.; Nakamura, K.; S ¯omiya, S. Graphitization of Carbon in Presence of Calcium Compounds under
Hydrothermal Condition by Use of High Gas Pressure Apparatus. In Hydrothermal Reactions for Materials
Science and Engineering; S ¯omiya, S., Ed.; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 1989; pp. 331–336. ISBN
978-94-010-6819-2.

73. Bragg, R.; Crooks, D.; Fenn, R.; Hammond, M. The effect of applied stress on the graphitization of pyrolytic

74.

graphite. Carbon 1964, 1, 171–179. [CrossRef]
Jurkiewicz, K.; Duber, S.; Fischer, H.E.; Burian, A. Modelling of glass-like carbon structure and its
experimental veriﬁcation by neutron and X-ray diffraction. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 2017, 50, 36–48. [CrossRef]

75. Harris, P.J.F. On charcoal. Interdiscip. Sci. Rev. 1999, 24, 301–306. [CrossRef]
76. Harris, P.J.F. Fullerene-related structure of commercial glassy carbons. Philos. Mag. 2004, 84, 3159–3167.

[CrossRef]

77. Harris, P.J.F.; Tsang, S.C. High-resolution electron microscopy studies of non-graphitizing carbons.

Philos. Mag. A 1997, 76, 667–677. [CrossRef]

78. Hancox, R.N.; Lamb, G.D.; Lehrle, R.S. Sample size dependence in pyrolysis: An embarrassment, or a utility?

J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis 1991, 19, 333–347. [CrossRef]

79. Donnet, J.-B. (Ed.) Carbon Fibers, 3rd ed.; Marcel Dekker: New York, NY, USA, 1998; ISBN 978-0-8247-0172-7.
80. Harris, P.J.F. Transmission Electron Microscopy of Carbon: A Brief History. C 2018, 4, 4. [CrossRef]
81.

Inagaki, M.; Yang, Y.; Kang, F. Carbon Nanoﬁbers Prepared via Electrospinning. Adv. Mater. 2012, 24,
2547–2566. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

82. Maitra, T.; Sharma, S.; Srivastava, A.; Cho, Y.-K.; Madou, M.; Sharma, A. Improved graphitization and
electrical conductivity of suspended carbon nanoﬁbers derived from carbon nanotube/polyacrylonitrile
composites by directed electrospinning. Carbon 2012, 50, 1753–1761. [CrossRef]

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

18 of 21

83.

Johnson, J.W.; Marjoram, J.R.; Rose, P.G. Stress Graphitization of Polyacrylonitrile Based Carbon Fibre.
Nature 1969, 221, 357–358. [CrossRef]

84. Ghazinejad, M.; Holmberg, S.; Pilloni, O.; Oropeza-Ramos, L.; Madou, M. Graphitizing Non-graphitizable

Carbons by Stress-induced Routes. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 16551. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

85. Zhao, Z.; Wang, E.F.; Yan, H.; Kono, Y.; Wen, B.; Bai, L.; Shi, F.; Zhang, J.; Kenney-Benson, C.; Park, C.; et al.
Nanoarchitectured materials composed of fullerene-like spheroids and disordered graphene layers with
tunable mechanical properties. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 6212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

86. Awaji, H.; Choi, S.-M. Thermal Shock Tests and Thermal Shock Parameters for Ceramics. J. Korean Ceram. Soc.

2012, 49, 385–396. [CrossRef]

87. Garion, C. Mechanical Properties for Reliability Analysis of Structures in Glassy Carbon. World J. Mech. 2014,

4, 79–89. [CrossRef]
Fischbach, D.B. Magnetic susceptibility of glassy carbon. Carbon 1967, 5, 565–570. [CrossRef]

88.
89. Kinoshita, K. Carbon: Electrochemical and Physicochemical Properties; Wiley: New York, NY, USA, 1988; ISBN

978-0-471-84802-8.

90. Hu, M.; He, J.; Zhao, Z.; Strobel, T.A.; Hu, W.; Yu, D.; Sun, H.; Liu, L.; Li, Z.; Ma, M.; et al. Compressed
glassy carbon: An ultrastrong and elastic interpenetrating graphene network. Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, e1603213.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

91. Angle, M.; Blair, G.; Maier, C. Method for Molding Glass Lenses. U.S. Patent No. 3833347, 3 September 1974.
Stanley, J.; Klawitter, J.; More, R. Replacing joints with pyrolytic carbon. In Joint Replacement Technology;
92.
Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2008; pp. 631–656. ISBN 978-1-84569-245-2.
Schnitman, P.A.; Woolfson, M.W.; Feingold, R.M.; Gettleman, L.; Freedman, H.M.; Kalis, P.J.; Buchanan, W.;
Shulman, L.B. Vitreous carbon implants: A ﬁve-year study in baboons. J. Prosthet. Dent. 1980, 44, 190–200.
[CrossRef]

93.

94. Hucke, E.E.; Fuys, R.A.; Craig, R.G. Glassy carbon: A potential dental implant material. J. Biomed. Mater. Res.

1973, 7, 263–274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

95. VanDersarl, J.J.; Mercanzini, A.; Renaud, P. Integration of 2D and 3D Thin Film Glassy Carbon Electrode
Arrays for Electrochemical Dopamine Sensing in Flexible Neuroelectronic Implants. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015,
25, 78–84. [CrossRef]

96. Vomero, M.; Castagnola, E.; Ciarpella, F.; Maggiolini, E.; Goshi, N.; Zucchini, E.; Carli, S.; Fadiga, L.;
Kassegne, S.; Ricci, D. Highly Stable Glassy Carbon Interfaces for Long-Term Neural Stimulation and
Low-Noise Recording of Brain Activity. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 40332. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

97. Castagnola, E.; Winchester Vahidi, N.; Nimbalkar, S.; Rudraraju, S.; Thielk, M.; Zucchini, E.; Cea, C.; Carli, S.;
Gentner, T.Q.; Ricci, D.; et al. In Vivo Dopamine Detection and Single Unit Recordings Using Intracortical
Glassy Carbon Microelectrode Arrays. MRS Adv. 2018, 3, 1629–1634. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

98. Yildizhan, Y.; Erdem, N.; Islam, M.; Martinez-Duarte, R.; Elitas, M. Dielectrophoretic Separation of Live and

Dead Monocytes Using 3D Carbon-Electrodes. Sensors 2017, 17, 2691. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

99. Hirabayashi, M.; Mehta, B.; Nguyen, B.; Kassegne, S. DNA immobilization on high aspect ratio glassy carbon
(GC-MEMS) microelectrodes for bionanoelectronics applications. Microsyst. Technol. 2015, 21, 2359–2365.
[CrossRef]

100. Mohamed Hassan, Y.; Caviglia, C.; Hemanth, S.; Mackenzie, D.M.A.; Petersen, D.H.; Keller, S.S. Pyrolytic

carbon microelectrodes for impedance based cell sensing. ECS Trans. 2016, 72, 35–44. [CrossRef]

101. Mardegan, A.; Kamath, R.; Sharma, S.; Scopece, P.; Ugo, P.; Madou, M. Optimization of Carbon Electrodes

Derived from Epoxy-based Photoresist. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2013, 160, B132–B137. [CrossRef]

102. Sharma, S.; Madou, M. A new approach to gas sensing with nanotechnology. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math.

Phys. Eng. Sci. 2012, 370, 2448–2473. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

103. Thiha, A.; Ibrahim, F.; Muniandy, S.; Dinshaw, I.J.; Teh, S.J.; Thong, K.L.; Leo, B.F.; Madou, M. All-carbon
suspended nanowire sensors as a rapid highly-sensitive label-free chemiresistive biosensing platform.
Biosens. Bioelectron. 2018, 107, 145–152. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

104. Kamath, R.R.; Madou, M.J. Three-Dimensional Carbon Interdigitated Electrode Arrays

for

Redox-Ampliﬁcation. Anal. Chem. 2014, 86, 2963–2971. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

105. Elitas, M.; Martinez-Duarte, R.; Dhar, N.; McKinney, J.D.; Renaud, P. Dielectrophoresis-based puriﬁcation of

antibiotic-treated bacterial subpopulations. Lab Chip 2014, 14, 1850–1857. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

19 of 21

106. Jaramillo, M.d.C.; Martínez-Duarte, R.; Hüttener, M.; Renaud, P.; Torrents, E.; Juárez, A. Increasing PCR
sensitivity by removal of polymerase inhibitors in environmental samples by using dielectrophoresis.
Biosens. Bioelectron. 2013, 43, 297–303. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

107. Sharma, D.; Lee, J.; Seo, J.; Shin, H. Development of a Sensitive Electrochemical Enzymatic Reaction-Based
Cholesterol Biosensor Using Nano-Sized Carbon Interdigitated Electrodes Decorated with Gold
Nanoparticles. Sensors 2017, 17, 2128. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

108. Amato, L.; Schulte, L.; Heiskanen, A.; Keller, S.S.; Ndoni, S.; Emnéus, J. Novel Nanostructured Electrodes

Obtained by Pyrolysis of Composite Polymeric Materials. Electroanalysis 2015, 27, 1544–1549. [CrossRef]

109. Fuhrer, E.; Bäcker, A.; Kraft, S.; Gruhl, F.J.; Kirsch, M.; MacKinnon, N.; Korvink, J.G.; Sharma, S. 3D Carbon
Scaffolds for Neural Stem Cell Culture and Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2018, 7,
1700915. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

110. Mitra, J.; Jain, S.; Sharma, A.; Basu, B. Patterned growth and differentiation of neural cells on polymer
derived carbon substrates with micro/nano structures in vitro. Carbon 2013, 65, 140–155. [CrossRef]
111. Schroer, A.; Bauer, J.; Schwaiger, R.; Kraft, O. Optimizing the mechanical properties of polymer resists for

strong and light-weight micro-truss structures. Extreme Mech. Lett. 2016, 8, 283–291. [CrossRef]

112. Manoharan, M.P.; Lee, H.; Rajagopalan, R.; Foley, H.C.; Haque, M.A. Elastic Properties of 4–6 nm-thick

Glassy Carbon Thin Films. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2010, 5, 14–19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

113. Rajagopalan, R.; Ponnaiyan, A.; Mankidy, P.J.; Brooks, A.W.; Yi, B.; Foley, H.C. Molecular sieving platinum
nanoparticle catalysts kinetically frozen in nanoporous carbon. Chem. Commun. 2004, 21, 2498–2499.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

114. Kim, J.; Hong, D.; Badshah, M.; Lu, X.; Kim, Y.; Kim, S. Direct Metal Forming of a Microdome Structure with

a Glassy Carbon Mold for Enhanced Boiling Heat Transfer. Micromachines 2018, 9, 376. [CrossRef]

115. Jang, H.; Refatul Haq, M.; Kim, Y.; Kim, J.; Oh, P.; Ju, J.; Kim, S.-M.; Lim, J. Fabrication of Glass Microchannel
via Glass Imprinting using a Vitreous Carbon Stamp for Flow Focusing Droplet Generator. Sensors 2017, 18,
83. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

116. Martinez-Duarte, R. SU-8 Photolithography as a Toolbox for Carbon MEMS. Micromachines 2014, 5, 766–782.

[CrossRef]

117. Ohlinger, K.; Lin, Y.; Poole, Z.; Chen, K.P. Undistorted 3D microstructures in SU8 formed through two-photon

polymerization. AIP Adv. 2011, 1, 032163. [CrossRef]

118. Ghosh, S.; Ananthasuresh, G.K. Single-photon-multi-layer-interference lithography for high-aspect-ratio

and three-dimensional SU-8 micro-/nanostructures. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 18428. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
119. Schmitt, C.R. Polyfurfuryl Alcohol Resins. Polym.-Plast. Technol. Eng. 1974, 3, 121–158. [CrossRef]
120. Natu, R.; Islam, M.; Gilmore, J.; Martinez-Duarte, R. Shrinkage of SU-8 microstructures during carbonization.

J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis 2018, 131, 17–27. [CrossRef]

121. Yi, Y.; Weinberg, G.; Prenzel, M.; Greiner, M.; Heumann, S.; Becker, S.; Schlögl, R. Electrochemical corrosion

of a glassy carbon electrode. Catal. Today 2017, 295, 32–40. [CrossRef]

122. Shesterkin, V.I. Effective emission area of multiple-tip autoemission matrices made of glassy carbon.

J. Commun. Technol. Electron. 2014, 59, 833–837. [CrossRef]

123. Ssenyange, S.; Du, R.; McDermott, M.T. Fabrication of arrays of carbon micro- and nanostructures via

electrochemical etching. Micro Nano Lett. 2009, 4, 22–26. [CrossRef]

124. Lee, W.; Nam, E.; Lee, C.-Y.; Jang, K.-I.; Min, B.-K. Electrochemical oxidation assisted micromachining of

glassy carbon substrate. Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. 2015, 16, 419–422. [CrossRef]

125. Shesterkin, V.I.; Sokolova, T.N.; Morev, S.P.; Bessonov, D.A.; Surmenko, E.L.; Darmaev, A.N.; Komarov, D.A.;
Murav’ev, E.K.; Shalaev, P.D.; Shumikhin, K.V. Improvement in the properties of glassy-carbon ﬁeld-emission
cells in forming spikes with a high aspect ratio via laser milling. J. Commun. Technol. Electron. 2016, 61,
1044–1051. [CrossRef]

126. Kuhnke, M.; Lippert, T.; Scherer, G.G.; Wokaun, A. MicroFabrication of ﬂow ﬁeld channels in glassy carbon
by a combined laser and reactive ion etching process. Surf. Coat. Technol. 2005, 200, 730–733. [CrossRef]
127. Hans, L.E.; Prater, K.; Kilchoer, C.; Scharf, T.; Herzig, H.P.; Hermerschmidt, A. Wafer-level microstructuring

of glassy carbon. Proc. SPIE 2014, 8974. [CrossRef]

128. Prater, K.; Dukwen, J.; Scharf, T.; Herzig, H.P.; Plöger, S.; Hermerschmidt, A. Micro-structuring of glassy
carbon for precision glass molding of binary diffractive optical elements. Opt. Mater. Express 2016, 6,
3407–3416. [CrossRef]

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

20 of 21

129. Sasaki, T.; Takahashi, M.; Maeda, R.; Tanaka, T.; Maeno, T.; Yang, Z. Microstructures formed on a low
ﬂuorescent glass using glassy carbon molding. In Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology 27th Annual Conference, Shanghai, China, 17–18 January 2006; pp. 7126–7128.

130. Ssenyange, S.; Taylor, J.; Harrison, D.J.; McDermott, M.T. A Glassy Carbon Microﬂuidic Device for

Electrospray Mass Spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 2004, 76, 2393–2397. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

131. Fredriksson, H.; Chakarov, D.; Kasemo, B. Patterning of highly oriented pyrolytic graphite and glassy carbon

surfaces by nanolithography and oxygen plasma etching. Carbon 2009, 47, 1335–1342. [CrossRef]

132. Evans, J.F.; Kuwana, T. Introduction of functional groups onto carbon electrodes via treatment with

radio-frequency plasmas. Anal. Chem. 1979, 51, 358–365. [CrossRef]

133. Jouikov, V.; Simonet, J. Electrochemical conversion of glassy carbon into a poly-nucleophilic reactive material.
Applications for carbon chemical functionalization. A mini-review. Electrochem. Commun. 2014, 45, 32–36.
[CrossRef]

134. Via, G.G.; Shugart, C.L.; Melnyk, S.L.; Hupman, S.R.; Cline, K.K. One-Step Solvent-Free Synthesis and

Grafting of Diazonium Ions at Glassy Carbon Electrodes. Electroanalysis 2018. [CrossRef]

135. Engstrom, R.C.; Strasser, V.A. Characterization of electrochemically pretreated glassy carbon electrodes.

Anal. Chem. 1984, 56, 136–141. [CrossRef]

136. Chang, G.; Shu, H.; Ji, K.; Oyama, M.; Liu, X.; He, Y. Gold nanoparticles directly modiﬁed glassy carbon

electrode for non-enzymatic detection of glucose. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2014, 288, 524–529. [CrossRef]

137. Dogan-Topal, B.; Bozal-Palabıyık, B.; Uslu, B.; Ozkan, S.A. Multi-walled carbon nanotube modiﬁed
glassy carbon electrode as a voltammetric nanosensor for the sensitive determination of anti-viral drug
valganciclovir in pharmaceuticals. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 2013, 177, 841–847. [CrossRef]

138. DeClements, R.; Swain, G.M.; Dallas, T.; Holtz, M.W.; Herrick, R.D.; Stickney, J.L. Electrochemical and
Surface Structural Characterization of Hydrogen Plasma Treated Glassy Carbon Electrodes. Langmuir 1996,
12, 6578–6586. [CrossRef]

139. March, G.; Nguyen, T.; Piro, B. Modiﬁed Electrodes Used for Electrochemical Detection of Metal Ions in

Environmental Analysis. Biosensors 2015, 5, 241–275. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

140. McCreery, R.L. Advanced Carbon Electrode Materials for Molecular Electrochemistry. Chem. Rev. 2008, 108,

2646–2687. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

141. Aziz, M.A.; Almadi, R.; Yamani, Z.H. Indium Tin Oxide Nanoparticle-modiﬁed Glassy Carbon Electrode for
Electrochemical Sulﬁde Detection in Alcoholic Medium. Anal. Sci. 2018, 34, 599–604. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Hao, F.; Dong, P.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, Y.; Loya, P.E.; Hauge, R.H.; Li, J.; Lou, J.; Lin, H. High Electrocatalytic
Activity of Vertically Aligned Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes towards Sulﬁde Redox Shuttles. Sci. Rep.
2012, 2, 368. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

143. Liu, Y.; Shen, Y.; Sun, L.; Li, J.; Liu, C.; Ren, W.; Li, F.; Gao, L.; Chen, J.; Liu, F.; et al. Elemental superdoping

of graphene and carbon nanotubes. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 10921. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

144. Li, Z.; Zhang, J.; Zhou, Y.; Shuang, S.; Dong, C.; Choi, M.M.F. Electrodeposition of palladium nanoparticles
on fullerene modiﬁed glassy carbon electrode for methane sensing. Electrochim. Acta 2012, 76, 288–291.
[CrossRef]

145. El-Cheick, F.M.; Rashwan, F.A.; Mahmoud, H.A.; El-Rouby, M. Gold nanoparticle-modiﬁed glassy carbon
electrode for electrochemical investigation of aliphatic di-carboxylic acids in aqueous media. J. Solid State
Electrochem. 2010, 14, 1425–1443. [CrossRef]

146. Georgakilas, V.; Gournis, D.; Tzitzios, V.; Pasquato, L.; Guldi, D.M.; Prato, M. Decorating carbon nanotubes

with metal or semiconductor nanoparticles. J. Mater. Chem. 2007, 17, 2679–2694. [CrossRef]

147. Gerhardt, G.A.; Oke, A.F.; Nagy, G.; Moghaddam, B.; Adams, R.N. Naﬁon-coated electrodes with high

selectivity for CNS electrochemistry. Brain Res. 1984, 290, 390–395. [CrossRef]

148. Shah, A.; Mahmood, A.; Mehmood, R.; Rehman, S.; Ozkan, S.A.; Shah, A.H. Gold-Ruthenium Alloy
Nanoparticles Modiﬁed Glassy Carbon Electrode as a Sensing Platform for the Trace Level Detection of
Indol-3-Carbaldehyde. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 164, B542–B547. [CrossRef]

149. Suherman, A.L.; Ngamchuea, K.; Tanner, E.E.L.; Sokolov, S.V.; Holter, J.; Young, N.P.; Compton, R.G.
Electrochemical Detection of Ultratrace (Picomolar) Levels of Hg2+ Using a Silver Nanoparticle-Modiﬁed
Glassy Carbon Electrode. Anal. Chem. 2017, 89, 7166–7173. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

150. Sophia, J.; Muralidharan, G. Amperometric sensing of hydrogen peroxide using glassy carbon electrode

modiﬁed with copper nanoparticles. Mater. Res. Bull. 2015, 70, 315–320. [CrossRef]

Materials 2018, 11, 1857

21 of 21

151. Ali, N.; Ali, M.; Ali, E.; Ali, A. Electrocatalytic behaviour of Ni and NiCu alloy modiﬁed glassy carbon

electrode in electro-oxidation of contraﬂam. J. Cent. South Univ. 2017, 24, 1703–1712. [CrossRef]

152. Singh, B.P.; Kumar, A.; Duarte, A.P.; Rojas, S.J.; Crespo-Medina, M.; Areizaga-Martinez, H.I.;
Vega-Olivencia, C.A.; Tomar, M.S. Synthesis, characterization, and electrochemical response of iron oxide
nanoparticles for sensing acetaminophen. Mater. Res. Express 2016, 3, 106105. [CrossRef]

153. Song, X.; Ya, Y.; Tan, X.; Li, C.; Zhang, S. Electrochemical Fabrication of SiO2 Nanoparticles Modiﬁed Glassy
Carbon Electrode and Its Application in Tryptophan Sensing. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. Lett. 2013, 5, 1119–1124.
[CrossRef]

154. Priyatharshni, S.; Tamilselvan, A.; Viswanathan, C.; Ponpandian, N. LaCoO3 Nanostructures Modiﬁed
Glassy Carbon Electrode for Simultaneous Electrochemical Detection of Dopamine, Ascorbic Acid and Uric
Acid. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 164, B152–B158. [CrossRef]

155. Jagadish, R.; Yellappa, S.; Mahanthappa, M.; Chandrasekhar, K.B. Zinc Oxide Nanoparticle-modiﬁed Glassy
J. Chin.

Carbon Electrode as a Highly Sensitive Electrochemical Sensor for the Detection of Caffeine.
Chem. Soc. 2017, 64, 813–821. [CrossRef]

156. Jain, R.; Rather, J.A.; Dwivedi, A. Vikas Highly Sensitive and Selective Voltammetric Sensor Fullerene
Modiﬁed Glassy Carbon Electrode for Determination of Ceﬁtizoxime in Solubilized System. Electroanalysis
2010, 22, 2600–2606. [CrossRef]

157. Ahmad, K.; Mohammad, A.; Ansari, S.N.; Mobin, S.M. Construction of graphene oxide sheets based modiﬁed
glassy carbon electrode (GO/GCE) for the highly sensitive detection of nitrobenzene. Mater. Res. Express
2018, 5, 075601. [CrossRef]

158. Habibi, B.; Jahanbakhshi, M. A glassy carbon electrode modiﬁed with carboxylated diamond nanoparticles
for differential pulse voltammetric simultaneous determination of guanine and adenine. Microchim. Acta
2016, 183, 2317–2325. [CrossRef]

159. Karikalan, N.; Karthik, R.; Chen, S.-M.; Chen, H.-A. A voltammetric determination of caffeic acid in red
wines based on the nitrogen doped carbon modiﬁed glassy carbon electrode. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 45924.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

160. Cui, X.; Wu, S.; Li, Y.; Wan, G. Sensing hydrogen peroxide using a glassy carbon electrode modiﬁed with
in-situ electrodeposited platinum-gold bimetallic nanoclusters on a graphene surface. Microchim. Acta 2015,
182, 265–272. [CrossRef]

161. Peng, Z.; Jiang, Z.; Huang, X.; Li, Y. A novel electrochemical sensor of tryptophan based on silver
nanoparticles/metal–organic framework composite modiﬁed glassy carbon electrode. RSC Adv. 2016,
6, 13742–13748. [CrossRef]

162. Radhi, M.M.; Amir, Y.K.A.; Alwan, S.H.; Tee, T.W. Electrochemical Effect of Different Modiﬁed Glassy
Carbon Electrodes on the Values of Diffusion Coefﬁcient for Some Heavy Metal Ions. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2013,
431, 012018. [CrossRef]

163. Mphuthi, N.G.; Adekunle, A.S.; Fayemi, O.E.; Olasunkanmi, L.O.; Ebenso, E.E. Phthalocyanine Doped Metal
Oxide Nanoparticles on Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes Platform for the detection of Dopamine. Sci. Rep.
2017, 7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

164. Bukalov, S.S.; Zubavichus, Y.V.; Leites, L.; Sorokin, A.I.; Kotosonov, A.S. Structural changes in industrial
glassy carbon as a function of heat treatment temperature according to Raman spectroscopy and X-Ray
diffraction data. Nanosyst. Phys. Chem. Math. 2014, 5, 186–191.

165. Galvan, D.; Pei, Y.T.; De Hosson, J.T.M.; Cavaleiro, A. Determination of the sp3 C content of a-C ﬁlms through

EELS analysis in the TEM. Surf. Coat. Technol. 2005, 200, 739–743. [CrossRef]

166. Niˇc, M.; Jirát, J.; Košata, B.; Jenkins, A.; McNaught, A. (Eds.) Glass-like carbon. In IUPAC Compendium of

Chemical Terminology; IUPAC: Research Triagle Park, NC, USA, 2009; ISBN 978-0-9678550-9-7.

167. Rachow, T.; Reber, S.; Janz, S.; Knapp, M.; Milenkovic, N. Degradation of silicon wafers at high temperatures

for epitaxial deposition. Energy Sci. Eng. 2016, 4, 344–351. [CrossRef]

© 2018 by the author. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

