Article
Stress-Shot-Peened Leaf Springs Material Analysis through
Nano- and Micro-Indentations

Maria Pappa 1,*

, Georgios Savaidis 2 and Nikolaos Michailidis 1

1

2

Physical Metallurgy Laboratory, School of Mechanical Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
GR-54124 Thessaloniki, Greece; nmichail@auth.gr
Laboratory of Machine Elements and Machine Design, School of Mechanical Engineering, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, GR-54124 Thessaloniki, Greece; gsavaidis@auth.gr

* Correspondence: pappmari@auth.gr

Abstract: Heat-treated and shot-peened lightweight steels with demanding requirements for durabil-
ity are applied in high-performance automotive leaf springs. Due to their heat-treatment they exhibit
degraded properties in the surface-near area compared to the core. This area, which may extend
until 300 µm from the surface to the core, experiences the highest bending stresses at operation. The
microstructure in the surface and sub-surface layers determines the mechanical performance as well
as the wear resistance. The present study refers to the material properties of a stress shot-peened
51CrV4 steel at various depths from the surface. The effect of the manufacturing process has been
captured both by Vickers micro-hardness measurements and nanoindentation. The latter combined
with a Fine Element Method (FEM)-based algorithm enables the determination of variations in the
material’s stress–strain curves over the affected layers, which translate to internal stress changes.
The nanoindentation technique has been applied here successfully for the ﬁrst time ever on leaf
springs. The combination of microstructural analysis, microhardness and nanoindentation captures
the changes of the treated material, offering insights on the material characteristics, and yielding
accurate elastoplastic material properties for local, layered-based analysis of the components’ me-
chanical performance at operational loading scenarios, i.e., in the framework of stress shot-peening
simulation models.

Citation: Pappa, M.; Savaidis, G.;

Michailidis, N. Stress-Shot-Peened

Leaf Springs Material Analysis

through Nano- and

Micro-Indentations. Materials 2021,

14, 4795. https://doi.org/10.3390/

ma14174795

Keywords: nanoindentation; microstructural analysis; mechanical properties; shot peening

Academic Editors: Bryan M. Wong

and Danny V. van Hemelrijck

Received: 14 July 2021

Accepted: 19 August 2021

Published: 24 August 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

iations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

1. Introduction

High strength steels with ultimate tensile strength >1600 MPa after quenching and
tempering are used in technological areas, where the superior strength and enhanced fa-
tigue life are essential for the overall safety of the structure. Most demanding applications
exploiting the full potential of such steels is in load-bearing automotive axle suspension
components, of the respective industry being at the cutting edge of research and devel-
opment. The actual status of relevant surface treating processes, in particular the stress
shot-peening (SSP) for Z-links, antiroll bars, leaf or coil springs and torsion bars can be
described by the methods illustrated in [1–4], although these articles are ten to twenty
years old. Nowadays, the SSP process is considered the most promising and effective way
to enhance the fatigue properties of suspension components on an industrial scale. It has
been adopted by all major manufacturers as a time- and cost-effective treatment for at least
doubling the fatigue life of their products, especially leaf springs [1]. However, the SSP pro-
cess control and optimization are very challenging tasks of high complexity: shot material,
geometry and hardness, shot velocity and incidence angle, degree of coverage and tensile
prestress interact with the already uncertain state of the area of application (decarburized
surface with reduced strength, inevitably induced by the preceding heat treatment). As
a result, the surface roughness, work hardening, and residual stresses are signiﬁcantly
affected. Over the past two decades research activities were focused on the SSP simulations

Materials 2021, 14, 4795. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma14174795

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/materials

materials(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Materials 2021, 14, 4795

2 of 12

to elaborate optimal and reproducible processes. Unfortunately, this knowledge has so
far failed to be successfully transferred to suspension components, mainly because the
material properties acting at the failure-critical decarburized surface (a) are very difﬁcult
to be obtained accurately at a local level and (b) often differ signiﬁcantly from those of
the core [5]. Due to these handicaps and the multi-parametric and very complex technical
nature of the involved manufacturing procedures, the process optimization is still a labor-
intensive task that relies on individual experience and requires many experimentation
loops. The present work aims to overcome those deﬁciencies by determining the material
characteristics of industrially treated SSP leaf springs after heat treatment and tapering
(HTT) on the surface and the subsurface, employing micro- and nanoindentation combined
with sophisticated FEM-based modeling techniques of the nanoindentation. The particular
innovation of the current work lies in the novel application of nanoindentation on leaf
springs to characterize the critical surface and subsurface properties of the treated material
and determine “layered” elastoplastic stress-strain curves, that can feed capable SSP simula-
tion models to increase their calculation efﬁciency, contributing in the design and the more
realistic modeling of the processed materials towards product optimization. The results
presented here have been extracted from investigations performed within the framework
of the LIGHTTECH project (LIGHTTECH—Innovative Approaches of Stress Shot Peen-
ing and Fatigue Assessment for the Development of Lightweight, Durability-Enhanced
Automotive Steel Leaf Springs) [6].

2. Materials and Methods

The material used for high-performance leaf springs and studied here is 51CrV4 (1.8159)
steel grade. Its chemical composition according to DIN EN 10089 (Hot rolled steels for
quenched and tempered springs—Technical delivery conditions) is shown in Table 1. The
aluminum content is only 0.001 wt.% (information that is not specified in DIN EN 10089) due
to the silicon deoxidation.

Table 1. Chemical composition of the 51CrV4 steel grade according to DIN EN 10089.

C
[wt-%]

DIN EN 10089

0.47–0.55

Si
[wt-%]

≤0.40

Mn
[wt-%]

0.70–1.10

P
[wt-%]

≤0.025

S
[wt-%]

≤0.025

Cr
[wt-%]

V
[wt-%]

0.90–1.20

0.10–0.25

HTT is a process that leads to the hardening of steel. This is largely due to the pres-
ence of C atoms in the interference sites in the body-centered tetragonal (BCT) crystalline
martensite. Carbon occupies the same interfacial positions in austenite and martensite.
However, while austenite causes symmetric deformation, martensite causes non-symmetric
deformation, which is the predominant cause for the solid solution to solidify. The indus-
trial HTT treatment performed on the real size leaf springs involved: heating of the raw ﬂat
bar material at 850 ◦C, morphing of the leaf spring geometry via rollers, quenching in oil
of approximately 60 ◦C, and tempering at 450 ◦C. Figure 1 contains the technical drawing
of the leaf springs. The width is constant to 90 mm along the length of the specimen. The
central (or clamped) area of the leaf has a constant thickness of 32 mm over a length of
180 mm. The arms on the left and right sides have a parabolically decreasing thickness
along their length, as the distance from the central area is increasing. Table 2 contains
characteristic values of the thickness distribution of the leaf. Notice that the leaves are
subjected to three-point bending during operation, where a vertical load is introduced in
the central area and the support of the leaves occurs is facilitated by two cylinders with
diameter of 50 mm positioned at the two ends over a span of 1000 mm. The parabolic arms
have been designed with the purpose of experiencing approximately constant stresses over
their whole length during the three-point bending operation.

Materials 2021, 14, 4795

3 of 12

Figure 1. Technical drawing of the parabolic leaf spring specimens—dimension in [mm].

Table 2. Thickness of the leaf spring at various positions measured from the leaf centre.

Pos.

0

t[mm]

32.0

90

32.0

100

125

150

175

200

31.72

29.41

26.73

24.92

23.65

250

21.5

275

300

350

375

20.38

19.19

16.57

15.61

400

15.5

The surface properties are experimentally determined using small specimens extracted
from the parabolic arms of the leaf springs, after HTT and SSP processes, sequentially. The
specimens taken after the HTT process are thoroughly inspected to acquire all necessary
information regarding the microstructure and decarburization [7] state of the surface that
will undergo the SSP treatment at a next stage. This way, the underlying material properties
can be described in detail and correlated against the stages after the SSP treatment. Further
investigations including all scales of hardness and indentation (in nano- and micro-scale)
are also performed using the same specimens.

The microstructural inspection resides on specimens speciﬁcally prepared for this
purpose. The preparation of such is a meticulous and time-consuming process that consists
of several sequential stages that ensure the repeatability and robustness of the results, while
eliminate those parameters that could tamper with the outcome due to mishandling or
human error. The ﬁrst step is to cut out a relatively large portion out of the leaf specimen
(>50 mm in length) using a medium-scale ﬁxed cutting wheel with constant water cooling
of the cutting area. This ensures a temperature level below 100 ◦C during the whole cutting
process and hinders metallographic changes or transformations that would confuse the
end-result of the investigation. The next stage involves the extraction of smaller specimens
using a Buehler IsoMet low-speed sectioning diamond wheel (Lake Bluff, IL, USA) [8] that
removes most of the material of the previous cuts, to further eliminate even the slightest
suspicion of ending up with unwittingly thermally and mechanically inﬂuenced parts due
to cutting conditions. The remaining material is then mounted on a Bakelite housing (a
thermally conductive phenolic resin usually used for such cases) to facilitate the proper
specimen orientation, marking and labeling as well as the convenient handling during
preparation and inspection. The mounted samples were then mechanically ground in
several sequential steps employing BUEHLER VanguardTM 2000 (Lake Bluff, IL, USA)
automatic sample preparation system [9]. Chemical etching with NITAL 5% was performed
to reveal the microstructure. Following etching, the samples were washed in alcohol and
rapidly dried by the ﬂow of warm air.

To quantify the decarburization intensity and extent and correlate the anticipated
strength reduction with a practical mechanical property such as the tensile strength, several
series of micro-hardness measurements were conducted at all areas of interest. Hardness is
more of a characteristic mechanical property, rather than a fundamental physical property
of a material. It is deﬁned as the resistance to indentation and is determined by measuring
the dimensions of the permanent impression caused by an indenter of a speciﬁc geometry
at a predeﬁned load. The Vickers micro-hardness was selected and proﬁles over the depth
from the surface were allocated, verifying the decarburization zone observed through
microscopy and translating its characteristics to tangible quantitative values. A Shimadzu

Materials 2021, 14, 4795

4 of 12

type M (Schimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) microhardness tester was applied to carry out all Vickers
microhardness measurements.

To analyze the microstructure and the size of Vickers impressions performed on the
specimens, optical microscopy by a LEICA DM4000 (Wetzlar, Germany) [10] and scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) by Thermo Scientiﬁc Phenom ProX (Waltham, MA, USA) [11]
were applied.

Nanoindentation is used for testing the mechanical properties of materials, facilitated
by high-precision instrumentation in the nanometer scale [12]. The method is applied to
register the course of the applied load versus the resulting indentation depth (displacement).
It consists of two steps, the so-called loading stage and the unloading one. During the
loading stage, an indentation load applied on the indenter, forces it to penetrate into the
specimen. The load is gradually applied and at the same time the indentation depth is
measured. After the load is gradually removed (unloading stage), due to the resulting
material plastic deformation, there is a remaining depth [12]. In 2008, the ISO/TR 29381
was published [13], allowing for the evaluation of tensile properties of metallic materials
by instrumented indentation. The evolution of FEM-based algorithms in the evaluation
of nanoindentation results offers advanced capabilities in determining the exact contact
between the indenter and the test piece, thus enabling the accurate calculation of the
material hardness and stress–strain curves [14,15]. The loading stage is the one that is
used to translate the force versus indentation depth curves into stress–strain mechanical
behavior, while the unloading stage and the remaining indentation depth can be used to
verify the measurement and translate the procedure to nano-hardness values.

A nanoindentation device was developed from the research members to address the
speciﬁc needs and meet the set requirements. The instrument has a motorized workbench
with a working range of 50 x 140 mm and a positioning accuracy on each of the planar
axes of 1 µm. The load may range from 0.1 to 800 mN with a resolution of 0.05 mN, while
the indentation depth may reach the value of 30 µm, with a resolution of 0.06 nm. In
order to achieve such a high resolution, the load application is guided by a dual-stage
encoder, i.e., a conventional mechanical macro-stage and a second piezoelectric stage of
very high accuracy. Berkovich, Vickers, Knoop pyramid-like and 0.5–2 mm ball diamond
indenters can be employed to acquire the respective force versus indentation depth curves.
All functions of the indentation procedure are fully automated, and the apparatus is able
to record a large number of indentations over a small amount of time.

3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Microstructural Analysis

Figure 2 presents the microstructure in a longitudinal section of the leaf spring surface
and subsurface after HTT, and Figure 3 the corresponding section after HTT+SSP treatments.
Magniﬁcations of (a) 500× (images at the left-hand side) and (c) 1000× (images at the right-
hand side), while for reasons of comparison and referencing, the (b) microstructure of the
core of the specimens is presented at the bottom-left of the ﬁgures. This microstructure is
according to those of the heat-treated core surfaces that have been studied in [16], where
nanoindentations and stress strains were discussed for quenching and tempering through
a laser-based surface modiﬁcation process of a dual-phase spring steel.

Materials 2021, 14, 4795

5 of 12

Figure 2. Typical microstructure of the heat treatment and tapering (HTT) specimens (longitudinal
section): (a) close to the surface; (b) at the core (c) close to the surface at higher magniﬁcation.

Figure 3. Typical microstructure of the HTT + stress shot-peening (SSP) specimens (longitudinal
section): (a) close to the surface; (b) at the core (c) close to the surface at higher magniﬁcation and
(d) surface without chemical etching revealing the distortion caused by SSP.

Materials 2021, 14, 4795

6 of 12

The microstructure of Figure 2a is a typical tempered-martensite one. For steels with
up to 0.6% carbon content (51CrV4 has a carbon content in the range of 0.47–0.55%) lath
martensite is expected to form, as characteristically depicted in Figure 2c. Besides the
martensitic microstructure, retained austenite is also present as the result of tempering.
The tempering process allows nucleation of cementite by gradual stress relieving, until
the previous overabundance of martensite reaches the required equilibrium between
martensite and retained austenite. This is done to balance the competing behavior between
strength/hardness and brittleness (i.e., high content of martensite makes steel brittle, while
low content makes it weak/soft). It is evident that there is a certain extent of partial
decarburization up to about a characteristic depth ranging between 100 and 300 µm with a
decreasing intensity towards the core (“washed-out” white areas depict the lack of carbon).
The decarburization depth and qualitative intensity can be estimated according to the
standards [17,18], while the reasons for its occurrence should be sought among the surface
treatments applied during the leaf production, i.e., the heat treatment and the hot tapering,
as both are high-temperature processes that may promote the reaction of carbon with
oxygen towards the formation of CO2.

The observation of the microstructure after SSP (Figure 3a) post-HTT, reveals the
acupuncture martensite in the structure of the material, which is markedly different from
the other two cases (core and HTT). What has changed in this case is the orientation of
the needle-like structure of the martensite close to the surface, which has been severely
distorted by the high-velocity impact of the shots during SSP. In particular, the uppermost
surface layer seems to follow “swirling” patterns around locations where the impacts
released their bursts of kinetic energy. In an effort to achieve a quick and clear quantiﬁ-
cation of the SSP zone, it was proven very efﬁcient to capture by optical microscopy the
microstructure of the longitudinal section just after polishing without any chemical etching,
as Figure 3d presents.

Figure 4 shows various SEM images at higher magniﬁcations (6000x) than optical
microscopy allows. Zooming on Figure 4b of the SSP treatment after HTT, it can be noticed
that there is a radial-shaped pattern, illustrating the concentration of ﬂows around the
impact site of a shot. On the other hand, the HTT specimen does not seem to present such
microstructural distortion, as shown in Figure 4a.

Figure 4. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of longitudinal sections close to the surface of
the (a) HTT and (b) HTT+SSP at a magniﬁcation of 6000×.

Figure 5 shows SEM images at lower magnifications (2500x) for the cases of (a) HTT
and (b) HTT+SSP specimens, which offer a broader view of the previously mentioned mi-
crostructural deformation of HTT+SSP (Figure 5b), with the orientations of the lath martensite

Materials 2021, 14, 4795

7 of 12

being shifted to directions other than those evidenced in the core, and in comparison, to the
completely different microstructure of the HTT specimen (Figure 5a), as well.

Figure 5. SEM images of longitudinal sections close to the surface of the (a) HTT and (b) HTT
+ SSP specimens.

3.2. Micro-Hardness Analysis

The Vickers micro-hardness measured on a sample might depend on the selected
set of testing parameters alone from the material properties. Here, a major affecting
parameter is the weight applied on top of the indenter. This should be carefully selected to
allow for the acquaintance of results that will be realistic and practical for further analysis.
Therefore, a sensitivity analysis was initially performed to determine the right weight to
use. Figure 6 exemplarily illustrates the differences captured when measuring at the same
area of a specimen using 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 kilogram-force (kgf), for a duration of 15 sec.

Figure 6. Comparison of Vickers hardness distribution over the distance from the surface, measured
after applying 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 kgf (indentation time 15 sec); exemplary study on an HTT specimen.

The Vickers microhardness is determined by measuring the two diagonals of the rect-
angular impression through optical and electron microscopy. To achieve a high resolution
of the measured hardness distribution over the distance from the surface, a small interval

Materials 2021, 14, 4795

8 of 12

of about 20–25 µm was selected between the impressions and multiple measurements were
performed in an inclined pattern, especially near the surface edge, to avoid interference be-
tween successive impressions. In all the examined cases, the different applied weight force
did not yield to signiﬁcant changes in the measured Vickers hardness, with the lower loads
producing larger scatter-bands, since they capture only the localized hardness, especially
in regions where multiple phases coexist, while the impressions are not as sharp and clear
as those of a 0.3 kgf load.

It is evident that the “swirled” (HTT+SSP) and decarburized (HTT) microstructure
creates a relatively wider scatter of measurements for the 0.1 kgf case due to the higher
sensitivity of the method at severely distorted discrete areas. Hence, 0.3 kgf is selected to
better characterize the material state, particularly for the decarburized zone.

Figure 7 presents the Vickers micro-hardness measurements conducted on the lon-
gitudinal sections close to the surface of the HTT and HTT+SSP specimens. To increase
the accuracy of the results, the dimensions of the impressions and their distance from the
surface were measured employing SEM microscopy.

Figure 7. Vickers micro-hardness measurements, average distributions and scattering of results on
the HTT and HTT+SSP specimens along the distance from the surface.

It is noticeable that all measurements converge to almost the same distribution towards
the surface, regardless of the SSP treatment, which clearly dictates that the decarburization
during HTT is the dominant cause of the strength reduction towards the surface. SSP after
HTT increases the micro-hardness close to the surface, but the effect of decarburization is
still evident. Considering that the tensile strength of the raw material has been measured
to approximately 1000 N/mm2 [19], which corresponds to a HV of about 300, it can be
easily deducted that there is a decarburization layer of nearly 60 µm which fades out at
100 µm to 200 µm. Both HTT and HTT+SSP Vickers microhardness distributions converge
at their core (distance from the surface >0.6 mm) to almost the same microhardness value,
as both the decarburization (by HTT) and internal (residual) stresses (by SSP) are surface
phenomena that are eliminated at the core of the specimens.

3.3. Nanoindentation and Layered σ-ε Properties

The aim of the nanoindentation investigations was to determine first the layered proper-
ties of the HTT leaf specimens, and to ultimately gain detailed insights on the surface and
sub-surface mechanical properties after the SSP process. Therefore, several measurements
were conducted on different sites and subsurface distances (at least 30 measurements on each
distance), that were statistically evaluated to present the average, as well as the scatter of
each set [20]. The maximum applied load in all the investigated cases was kept constant at
15 mN (1.5 × 10−3 kgf) which results in indentation depths up to 0.3 µm. Figure 8 presents

Materials 2021, 14, 4795

9 of 12

the nanoindentation load-displacement diagrams of the HTT leaf specimens for the charac-
teristic distances from the surface of 20, 50, 100, 400 and 600 µm, while Figure 9 represents
the corresponding HTT+SSP ones. Because of the decarburization of HTT specimens, a
gradual strengthening is expected towards the core up to 600 µm. It is clearly indicated by
the nanoindentation measurements that the site after 300 µm can be considered as the core
material with zero decarburization.

Figure 8. Nanoindentation load-displacement diagrams for the HTT leaf spring specimens at charac-
teristic distances from the surface.

The gradual strengthening of the HTT material towards the core is evident through
the decrease of the indentation displacement, as the distance from the surface increases.
The 20 µm site corresponds to the maximum displacement, representing the decarburized
surface layer, while after 300 µm it is constant and stiff.

The diagrams at the bottom of Figures 8 and 9 present the course of maximum
indentation depth versus the distance from the treated surface, which correspond well
to the Vickers hardness relations. The SSP procedure resulted in an enhanced behavior,
especially at a distance from the surface of 100 µm, where both the micro- and nano-
indentations revealed a hardening behavior. This can be attributed to the maximum plastic
deformation and residual stresses caused by the shot peening process appearing at this
distance from the surface.

Materials 2021, 14, 4795

10 of 12

Figure 9. Nanoindentation load-displacement diagrams for the HTT+SSP leaf spring specimens at
characteristic distances from the surface.

With the aid of the maximum penetration depth, the remaining depth, and a number
of further parameters related to the nanoindentation procedure, the elasticity modulus
can be approximately determined through analytical evaluation methods [21,22]. The
“SSCUBONI” algorithm presented in [22], simulating in a stepwise manner the nanoinden-
tation, enables the extraction of materials’ stress–strain laws [23,24]. Figure 10 presents the
stress–strain curves (σ-ε) of the corresponding load-displacement measurements for HTT
and HTT+SSP, respectively, as already displayed in Figures 8 and 9.

Figure 10. Equivalent von Mises stress–strain plots characterizing the behavior of (a) HTT and (b) HTT+SSP leaf spring
specimens at distinct distances from the surface, calculated for the compressive nature of nanoindentation.

Materials 2021, 14, 4795

11 of 12

The calculated stress–strain behavior is in line both qualitatively with the reason-
ing of decarburization (higher strength towards the core) and quantitatively with the
micro-hardness measurements conducted at the same locations. This means that the
nanoindentation method can be successfully utilized to acquire a very detailed representa-
tion of the layered mechanical behavior in terms of σ-ε curves rather than plain hardness
values which can be correlated solely with a tensile strength value. These σ-ε curves are
essential for the realistic modelling of the SSP process, since they serve as the foundations of
the analysis, whose legitimacy and accuracy will dominantly determine the ﬁnal outcome.
This work highlights the novel quantitative determination of the stress–strain curves
of surface and subsurface material after exposure to SSP processes of leaf springs after
heat treatment. This knowledge is catalytic towards understanding the material behav-
ior and will enable the development of realistic computational models to assess failure.
The diagrams of Figures 6–9 showcase the gradient of plastic deformation which can be
quantiﬁed and translated to stress and strain as presented in Figure 10. The intense plastic
deformation of the subsurface is also evidenced by the microstructure of the longitudinal
sections [25,26].

4. Conclusions

Surface and sub-surface properties of the HTT and SSP processes on leaf specimens
have been thoroughly studied, both qualitatively and quantitatively. The microstructures
along the proﬁle thickness have been identiﬁed including the decarburization zone in-
tensity and extent caused by the heat treatment, employing a series of micro-hardness
measurements along the distance from the surface. Additionally, the SSP-affected zone
was determined on the heat-treated leaf springs through microstructural analysis and
indentations at various scales. In particular, the Vickers micro-hardness measurements
revealed signiﬁcant decrease of the material hardness in the decarburized surface layers
compared to that of the core. The nanoindentations performed along the distance from the
treated surface down to the core proved the work-hardening effect on the surface layers
as an outcome of the severe deformation imposed by the SSP process. The SSP process
may cause severe plastic deformation on the surface and subsurface of the specimens.
The microstructural changes are manifested through a “swirled-like” type of grains as
documented by SEM micrographs. However, this type of grain was extremely difﬁcult to
characterize in terms of grain size due to the high degree of distortion. Further analysis
of the nanoindentation load-displacement curves by FEM-based algorithms showed sig-
niﬁcant enhancement of σ-ε properties achieved by SSP up to the ﬁrst 200 µm, measured
from the surface, and allowed the extraction of “layered” elastoplastic stress–strain curves.
This is an outstanding achievement for these industrial applications, when considering the
total absence of data regarding the elastoplastic properties of decarburized HTT and SSP-
affected surface zones of suspension components. A further major beneﬁt of the availability
of such curves is their immediate usage within FEM-based SSP simulation models [5] to
provide sound understanding of the SSP phenomena occurring in the components’ surface
zones and increase the overall SSP simulation accuracy. The exercised work-hardening on
the surface layers as an outcome of the severe deformation imposed by the SSP process is
herein quantiﬁed in a tangible and measurable way, enabling the yield of conclusions with
industrial importance and the development of realistic computational models to predict
the life span.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.P., G.S. and N.M.; methodology, M.P.; validation,
N.M.; investigation, M.P.; resources, N.M.; data curation, M.P. and N.M.; writing—original draft
preparation, M.P.; writing—review and editing, N.M. and G.S.; visualization, G.S.; supervision,
N.M.; project administration, G.S.; funding acquisition, G.S. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This project has received funding from the Research Fund for Coal and Steel under grant
agreement No 799787.

Materials 2021, 14, 4795

12 of 12

Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author.

Acknowledgments: The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the Research Fund Coal and Steel.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.

Farrahi, G.H.; Lebrijn, J.L.; Couratin, D. Effect of shot peening on residual stress and fatigue life of a spring steel. Fatigue Fract.
Eng. Mater. Struct. 1995, 18, 211–220. [CrossRef]
Cammett, J. Shot peening of springs—A case study. Shot Peener 2008, 22, 8–16.
2.
Baiker, S. Shot Peening—A Dynamic Application and Its Future; Metal Finishing News (MFN) Publishing: Wetzikon, Switzerland, 2006.
3.
4. Müller, E.; Benning, O.; Rhönisch, B.; Yapi, A. Stress Peening of Miniblock-Springs, the most Sophisticated Coil Springs. In

Proceedings of the International Conference on Shot Peening, Tokyo, Japan, 15–18 September 2008.

5. Maliaris, G.; Gakias, C.; Malikoutsakis, M.; Savaidis, G. A FEM-Based 2D Model for Simulation and Qualitative Assessment of

6.

Shot-Peening Processes. Materials 2021, 14, 2784. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
LIGHTTECH—Innovative Approaches of Stress Shot Peening and Fatigue Assessment for the Development of Lightweight,
Durability-Enhanced Automotive Steel Leaf Springs. Research Fund Coal & Steel, GA 799787. Available online: https://
lighttechproject.com/ (accessed on 29 April 2021).
Kirk, D. Decarburization: The Silent Enemy. Shot Peener 2018, 26–34.
7.
Available online: https://www.buehler.com/isoMet-low-speed-cutter.php (accessed on 4 April 2021).
8.
9.
Available online: http://www.horizonindia.in/buehler/grinders-polishers/3-BUEHLERVANGUARD.pdf (accessed on 4 April 2021).
10. Available online: https://www.leica-microsystems.com/products/light-microscopes/p/leica-dm4000-m/ (accessed on 6 April 2021).
11. Available online: https://www.thermoﬁsher.com/gr/en/home/electron-microscopy/products/desktop-scanning-electron-

microscopes/phenom-prox.html (accessed on 20 May 2021).

12. Michailidis, N.; Bouzakis, K.-D.; Koenders, L.; Herrmann, K. Nanoindentation, CIRP Encyclopedia of Production Engineering; Springer:

13.

Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2014; pp. 1–9.
International Organization for Standardization. Metallic Materials—Measurement of Mechanical Properties by an Instrumented
Indentation Test—Indentation Tensile Properties; ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2008.

14. Michailidis, N.; Pappa, M. Application of strength properties determined by nanoindentations to describe the material response

in micro- and macro-indentation. CIRP Ann. 2009, 58, 511–514. [CrossRef]

15. Bouzakis, K.-D.; Pappa, M.; Maliaris, G.; Michailidis, N. Fast determination of parameters describing manufacturing imperfections

and operation wear of nanoindenter tips. Surf. Coat. Technol. 2013, 215, 218–223. [CrossRef]

16. Prabhakaran, S.; Kalainathan, S. Compound technology of manufacturing and multiple laser peening on microstructure and

17.

fatigue life of dual-phase spring steel. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2016, 674, 634–645. [CrossRef]
Swedish Institute for Standards. Standard Test Methods for Estimating the Depth of Decarburization of Steel Specimens; ASTM:
Stockholm, Sweden, 2014.
International Organization for Standardization. Steels—Determination of Depth of Decarburization; ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2003.
18.
19. Brnic, J.; Brcic, M.; Krscanski, S.; Lanc, D.; Niu, J.; Wang, P. Steel 51CrV4 under high temperatures, short-time creep and high

cycle fatigue. J. Constr. Steel Res. 2018, 468–476. [CrossRef]
International Organization for Standardization. Metallic Materials—Conversion of Hardness Values; ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2013.
20.
21. Oliver, W.; Pharr, G. An improved technique for determining hardness and elastic modulus using load and displacement sensing

indentation experiments. J. Mater. Res. 1992, 7, 1564–1583. [CrossRef]

22. Bouzakis, K.; Michailidis, N. An accurate and fast approach for determining materials stress–strain curves by nanoindentation

and its FEM-based simulation. Mater. Charact. 2006, 56, 147–157. [CrossRef]
Field, V.; Swain, M. A Simple Predictive Model for Spherical Indentation. J. Mater. Res. 1993, 8, 297–306. [CrossRef]

23.
24. Bouzakis, K.; Michailidis, N.; Erkens, G. Thin hard coatings stress–strain curve determination through a FEM supported

evaluation of nanoindentation test results. Surf. Coatings Technol. 2001, 102–109. [CrossRef]

25. An, L.; Sun, Y.-T.; Lu, S.-P.; Wang, Z.-B. Enhanced Fatigue Property of Welded S355J2W Steel by Forming a Gradient Nanostruc-

tured Surface Layer. Acta Met. Sin. (English Lett.) 2020, 33, 1252–1258. [CrossRef]

26. Zhang, K.; Wang, Z.B.; Lu, K. Enhanced fatigue property by suppressing surface cracking in a gradient nanostructured bearing

steel. Mater. Res. Lett. 2017, 5, 258–266.

