Article
Effect of Restorative Material on Mechanical Response of
Provisional Endocrowns: A 3D—FEA Study

João Paulo Mendes Tribst 1
Marco Antonio Bottino 2 and Mutlu Özcan 3,*

, Alexandre Luiz Souto Borges 2, Laís Regiane Silva-Concílio 1,

1

2

School of Dentistry, University of Taubaté, Taubaté, São Paulo 12020-340, Brazil;
joao.tribst@unesp.br (J.P.M.T.); regiane1@yahoo.com (L.R.S.-C.)
Institute of Science and Technology, São Paulo State University (Unesp), São José dos Campos,
São Paulo 12220-690, Brazil; alexanborges@gmail.com (A.L.S.B.); mmbottino@uol.com.br (M.A.B.)

3 Division of Dental Biomaterials, Center for Dental and Oral Medicine, Clinic for Reconstructive Dentistry,

University of Zurich, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland

* Correspondence: mutluozcan@hotmail.com

Abstract: The goal of this study was to evaluate the stress distribution in an endocrown restoration
according to different provisional restorative materials. An endodontically treated maxillary molar
model was selected for conducting the ﬁnite element analysis (FEA), with a determined amount of
dental remnant of 1.5 mm. The model was imported to the analysis software (ANSYS 19.2, ANSYS
Inc., Houston, TX, USA) in STEP format. All contacts were considered perfectly bonded. The me-
chanical properties of each structure were considered isotropic, linear, elastic, and homogeneous.
Three different provisional restorative materials were simulated (acrylic resin, bis-acrylic resin, and
resin composite). An axial load (300 N) was applied at the occlusal surface in the center of the restora-
tion. Results were determined by colorimetric stress maps of maximum principal stress, maximum
shear stress, and total deformation. The different materials inﬂuenced the stress distribution for all
structures; the higher the material’s elastic modulus, the lower the stress magnitude on the cement
layer. In the present study, all provisional restorative materials showed similar stress patterns in
the endocrown and on the cement layer however, with different magnitude. Based on this study
limitation, the use of resin composite to manufacture provisional endocrowns is suggested as a
promising material to reduce the stresses in the cement layer and in the dental tissue surfaces.

Keywords: dental restoration failure; endodontically treated teeth; ﬁnite element analysis; dental ma-
terials

1. Introduction

The use of provisional restorations during dental treatment is an integral part of
restorative procedures with indirect restorations, since it has important functions within
the timeframe between preparation of a tooth and until ﬁtting the ﬁnal restoration [1].
In this sense, the adequate maintenance of the provisional restorations during all the
dental treatment is extremely useful to promote an adequate oral health and can directly
affect the ceramic restoration success [1]. To perform a function properly, the provisional
restorations must meet esthetic, biologic, and also mechanical aspects, such as resistance
to dislodging forces and chewing loads [2,3]. Therefore, clinical complications, such as
catastrophic failures, should be avoided to not compromise the treatment longevity [3].
The restoration’s mechanical failure is usually justiﬁed in literature by the cyclic loading and
chewing, subjecting the restorative material to various forces in oral conditions, including
compressive force at the load application and tensile and shear stresses at the restoration’s
intaglio surface [3,4]. The provisional restoration failure can cause economic loss and
discomfort to both clinicians and patients, demanding repair procedures and sometimes a
new provisional crown manufacturing [3].

Citation: Tribst, J.P.M.; Borges,

A.L.S.; Silva-Concílio, L.R.; Bottino,

M.A.; Özcan, M. Effect of Restorative

Material on Mechanical Response of

Provisional Endocrowns: A 3D—FEA

Study. Materials 2021, 14, 649.

https://doi.org/10.3390/ma14030649

Academic Editor: Nikolaos Silikas

Received: 5 January 2021

Accepted: 26 January 2021

Published: 31 January 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

iations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Materials 2021, 14, 649. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma14030649

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/materials

materials(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Materials 2021, 14, 649

2 of 12

It is well known that the provisional restoration’s resistance will be proportional
with its anatomy and restorative material mechanical properties [4]. Basically, the provi-
sional restoration can be manufactured using resin-based materials currently available—
methacrylate resins, resin composite-based materials, and bis-acrylic resins [5]. Regardless
of the chosen material, a precise ﬁtting to the abutment tooth, proper ﬂow, wetting, and plas-
tic properties of the material are required [3–5]. However, the restoration volume can also
affect how the restorative material will dissipate the chewing loads and the material
mechanical response during stress situations.

One of the largest restoration volumes that can be used to restore a tooth is the en-
docrown design [6–12]. This restoration modality has emerged as a more conservative,
quick, and easy-to-assemble approach, in which the build-up and crown integrate into a
single structure and can be manufactured by computer-aided design using the pulp cham-
ber as part of their mechanical retention [6]. Since the adhesive surface between abutment
teeth and endocrowns is extended using micro-mechanical retention, the transmission of
forces to dental abutments can be improved in comparison with a full crown [7]. However,
this approach requires the presence of healthy cervical enamel and an adequate endodontic
treatment in the abutment tooth [10].

Several studies have been carried out investigating the restorative material used to
perform the endocrown treatment, reporting the use of ceramics, nanocomposites, and
hybrid materials [6–14]. In addition, clinical cases reported the use of acrylic resin [15],
resin composite [16], and bis-acrylic resin [17] as restorative material for the manufacturing
of interim endocrowns. Nevertheless, the reason to use each material has not been deeply
investigated and a comparison between them could be interesting for further studies and
to elucidate the effect on the biomechanical behavior. Besides this, and since the beneﬁts of
having an adequate (esthetic, biologic, and also mechanical) provisional restoration are
well known, the information regarding how the provisional materials affect the endocrown
mechanical response is still scarce in the literature.

In order to understand the biomechanical behavior of endocrown restorations and the
inﬂuence of restorative materials, a numerical simulation can be performed using the ﬁnite
element method (FEM). This method has been extensively reported in literature, with pre-
vious studies that have evaluated this treatment modality [5,7–10,14,18,19]. As advantages,
the FEM is able to identify problems by assessing the state of stress and deformation of ma-
terials and adhesive interfaces, evaluating the stress distribution generated by masticatory
loads with model standardization, and offering an acceptable approximate solution [20–22].
Usually, failure origin consists of regions of high stress concentration, previously evidenced
by the ﬁnite element analysis results [7].

Therefore, the objective of the present study was to evaluate the inﬂuence of restorative
material (at three levels) on the biomechanical behavior of endocrown restorations. The null
hypothesis was that there would be no difference between the restorative provisional
materials for the endocrown biomechanical behavior.

2. Materials and Methods

A previous reported tridimensional ﬁrst maxillary molar model was selected [7].
The use of a previous numerical model that has been compared with in vitro setup is
important to guarantee the model validation in terms of failures. The ﬁle in standard for
the exchange of product data (STEP) was exported to the modeling software (Rhinoceros
version 4.0 SR8, McNeel North America, Seattle, WA, USA). The model was composed
of the following geometries: cement layer (100 µm thickness) [6], dental preparation, and
ﬁxation cylinder [9]. In the present study, the purpose was to simulate the condition of a
temporary endocrown prior to the ﬁnal indirect restoration. The restoration intaglio surface
was modiﬁed to allow all the contacting faces of the restoration and the cement layer to
have similar number and shape, reducing the interference during the analysis [6]. The root
model had a pulp chamber of 5 mm depth and a 16◦ wall inclination angle [7]. The ﬁnish

Materials 2021, 14, 649

3 of 12

line presented 1 mm of thickness. The endcrown presented a minimum thickness of 7 mm
at the center of the occlusal surface [7] and 1.5 mm of sound enamel was considered [8].

All geometries were veriﬁed as a volumetric solid without inconsistent normal or
duplicate faces. Figure 1 shows the schematic illustration of the modeling. All models
were exported to the analysis software (ANSYS 19.2, ANSYS Inc., Houston, TX, USA)
and a convergence test of 10% mesh control determined the number of 98.653 nodes
and 96.484 tetrahedral elements for the model (Figure 2). The aspect ratio of the mesh
elements presented an average value of 1.8 ± 0.7 [7]. A conforming mesh across such
interfaces ensures inter-element continuity in the ﬁnite element shape functions, resulting
in a smooth and accurate interpolation of the numerical solution. Therefore, the mesh
matching procedure was performed to remove the nonconforming interfaces. These
elements allowed the stress transmission from the restoration to the cement, and, from the
cement to the tooth with a reduced distortion caused by the mesh in the involved structures.
Three different temporary restorative materials were chosen based in previous clinical cases
that performed provisional endocrown restoration (acrylic resin, bis-acrylic resin, and resin
composite). The mechanical properties of each material/structure (Table 1) were inserted
into the analysis software and each material was considered isotropic and homogeneous.
As the analysis was performed considering a no-failure condition, all materials were
assumed to behave as elastic materials. Bonded contacts were considered between the
structures. In the boundary condition, the ﬁxation occurred at the base of the polyurethane
cylinder with ﬁxed zero nodal displacements. Ensuring only the movement constraint on
the Z-axis, the deformation generated in all directions could be computed. The occlusal
loading (300 N) was applied to simulate a compressive load in the center of the cusps.
For the restoration and the tooth adhesive area, the failure criteria was the maximum
principal stress (in MPa). While for the cement layer, the tensile stress and shear stress were
recorded. A qualitative stress map was generated from the postprocessing software, using
color scales in these structures, and the highest peak in each structure was evaluated [6].
Differences with more than 10% were assumed as relevant between the models.

Figure 1. Three-dimensional model created in the modelling software with different provisional
endocrown restorations.

Materials 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 12   have similar number and shape, reducing the interference during the analysis [6]. The root model had a pulp chamber of 5 mm depth and a 16° wall inclination angle [7]. The finish line presented 1 mm of thickness. The endcrown presented a minimum thickness of 7 mm at the center of the occlusal surface [7] and 1.5 mm of sound enamel was considered [8]. All geometries were verified as a volumetric solid without inconsistent normal or duplicate faces. Figure 1 shows the schematic illustration of the modeling. All models were exported to the analysis software (ANSYS 19.2, ANSYS Inc., Houston, TX, USA) and a convergence test of 10% mesh control determined the number of 98.653 nodes and 96.484 tetrahedral elements for the model (Figure 2). The aspect ratio of the mesh elements pre-sented an average value of 1.8 ± 0.7 [7]. A conforming mesh across such interfaces ensures inter-element continuity in the finite element shape functions, resulting in a smooth and accurate interpolation of the numerical solution. Therefore, the mesh matching procedure was performed to remove the nonconforming interfaces. These elements allowed the stress transmission from the restoration to the cement, and, from the cement to the tooth with a reduced distortion caused by the mesh in the involved structures. Three different temporary restorative materials were chosen based in previous clinical cases that per-formed provisional endocrown restoration (acrylic resin, bis-acrylic resin, and resin com-posite). The mechanical properties of each material/structure (Table 1) were inserted into the analysis software and each material was considered isotropic and homogeneous.  Figure 1. Three-dimensional model created in the modelling software with different provisional endocrown restorations. Materials 2021, 14, 649

4 of 12

Figure 2. Finite element model after meshing process and boundary conditions applied in the simulation.

Table 1. Mechanical properties of the materials/structures used in the current study.

Material/Structure

Composition

Elastic Modulus
(GPa) *

Poisson
Ratio

Reference

Enamel
Dentin
Fixation cylinder
Temporary cement

Acrylic resin

Bis-acrylic resin

Resin composite

-
-
Polyurethane resin
Zinc oxide-based cement
Polymethyl methacrylate, diethyl
phthalate, benzoyl peroxide,
titanium dioxide.
UDMA, bis-GMA, benzoyl
peroxide, Amine and ﬁllers.
UDMA, bis-GMA, bis-EMA,
TEGDMA, Silica and ﬁllers.

* Values obtained from the literature.

3. Results

80
18
3.6
1.35

2.2

2.9

8.0

0.30
0.23
0.30
0.30

0.30

0.30

0.25

[22]
[22]
[5]
[23]

[5]

[5]

[22]

After the processing, maximum principal stress (MPa) results were obtained for the
endocrown, cement layer, and dental remnant structures. Maximum shear stress (MPa)
results were obtained for the endocrown pulp chamber extension and the cement layer.
Displacement (mm) was obtained for the endocrown margin. Data were summarized
through colorimetric graphs (Figures 3–9). For the endocrown restoration (Figures 3 and 4),

Materials 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 12    Figure 2. Finite element model after meshing process and boundary conditions applied in the sim-ulation.   Materials 2021, 14, 649

5 of 12

a similar stress distribution pattern was observed regardless the restorative material;
however, the more rigid the temporary material was, higher stress concentration was
observed in the endocrown (resin composite > bis-acrylic resin > acrylic resin). In addition,
for the restoration marginal displacement (Figure 5), the endocrown in resin composite
(0.0034 mm) was the less susceptible to deformation, suggesting the lowest chance to fail in
this region, when compared to the endocrowns made in bis-acrylic (0.0041 mm) or acrylic
resin (0.0042 mm). Observing the endocrown pulp-chamber extension (Figure 6), when the
endocrown in resin composite was evaluated, the shear stress resin composite was higher
than the endocrowns in bis-acrylic resin or acrylic resin, demanding higher bond strength
in this region.

Figure 3. Tensile stress distribution in the sectioned endocrown according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin,
(B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) resin composite.

Figure 4. Tensile stress distribution in the endocrown’s intaglio surface according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic
resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.

Figure 5. Displacement in the endocrown’s margin surface according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-
acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.

Figure 6. Maximum shear stress in the endocrown’s pulp-chamber extension according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic
resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.

Materials 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 12   A summary of means, standard deviations, minimum, and maximum values of the stress peaks is presented in Table 2.  Figure 3. Tensile stress distribution in the sectioned endocrown according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) resin composite.  Figure 4. Tensile stress distribution in the endocrown’s intaglio surface according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 5. Displacement in the endocrown’s margin surface according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 6. Maximum shear stress in the endocrown’s pulp-chamber extension according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 7. Tensile stress in the dental remnant according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin. Materials 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 12   A summary of means, standard deviations, minimum, and maximum values of the stress peaks is presented in Table 2.  Figure 3. Tensile stress distribution in the sectioned endocrown according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) resin composite.  Figure 4. Tensile stress distribution in the endocrown’s intaglio surface according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 5. Displacement in the endocrown’s margin surface according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 6. Maximum shear stress in the endocrown’s pulp-chamber extension according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 7. Tensile stress in the dental remnant according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin. Materials 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 12   A summary of means, standard deviations, minimum, and maximum values of the stress peaks is presented in Table 2.  Figure 3. Tensile stress distribution in the sectioned endocrown according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) resin composite.  Figure 4. Tensile stress distribution in the endocrown’s intaglio surface according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 5. Displacement in the endocrown’s margin surface according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 6. Maximum shear stress in the endocrown’s pulp-chamber extension according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 7. Tensile stress in the dental remnant according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin. Materials 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 12   A summary of means, standard deviations, minimum, and maximum values of the stress peaks is presented in Table 2.  Figure 3. Tensile stress distribution in the sectioned endocrown according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) resin composite.  Figure 4. Tensile stress distribution in the endocrown’s intaglio surface according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 5. Displacement in the endocrown’s margin surface according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 6. Maximum shear stress in the endocrown’s pulp-chamber extension according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 7. Tensile stress in the dental remnant according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin. Materials 2021, 14, 649

6 of 12

Figure 7. Tensile stress in the dental remnant according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin,
and (C) composite resin.

Figure 8. Tensile stress in the cement layer according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin,
and (C) resin composite.

Figure 9. Maximum shear stress in the cement layer according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic
resin, and (C) resin composite.

On the tooth surfaces (Figure 7), less stress concentration was observed with more
rigid restorative materials. Basically, the material that concentrated more stress in the
endocrown restoration showed less stress in the tooth adhesive surface (acrylic resin >
bis-acrylic resin > resin composite). Regardless the restorative material, the enamel tissue
concentrated more stress than the dentin. A similar behavior was observed for the cement
layer, for both tensile and shear stresses (Figures 8 and 9, respectively). In this sense,
the resin composite endocrown seems to be less prone to adhesive failures in comparison
with the other two materials.

A summary of means, standard deviations, minimum, and maximum values of the

stress peaks is presented in Table 2.

Table 2. Stress peaks (MPa) obtained in each structure after the analysis processing.1

Acrylic Resin

Bis-Acrylic Resin

Resin Composite

Tensile stress in the endocrown
Shear stress in the endocrown
Tensile stress in the cement layer
Shear stress in the cement layer
Tensile stress in the enamel tissue
Tensile stress in the dentin tissue

9.6
4.2
8.9
9.2
16.5
15.9

1 Stress peaks automatic identiﬁed by the software.

9.7
4.3
8.8
9.0
16.1
15.2

10.1
4.7
3.4
7.5
13.4
9.3

Materials 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 12   A summary of means, standard deviations, minimum, and maximum values of the stress peaks is presented in Table 2.  Figure 3. Tensile stress distribution in the sectioned endocrown according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) resin composite.  Figure 4. Tensile stress distribution in the endocrown’s intaglio surface according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 5. Displacement in the endocrown’s margin surface according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 6. Maximum shear stress in the endocrown’s pulp-chamber extension according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin.  Figure 7. Tensile stress in the dental remnant according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) composite resin. Materials 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 12    Figure 8. Tensile stress in the cement layer according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) resin composite.  Figure 9. Maximum shear stress in the cement layer according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) resin composite. Table 2. Stress peaks (MPa) obtained in each structure after the analysis processing.1  Acrylic Resin Bis-Acrylic Resin Resin Compo-site Tensile stress in the endocrown 9.6 9.7 10.1 Shear stress in the endocrown 4.2 4.3 4.7 Tensile stress in the cement layer 8.9 8.8 3.4 Shear stress in the cement layer 9.2 9.0 7.5 Tensile stress in the enamel tissue 16.5 16.1 13.4 Tensile stress in the dentin tissue 15.9 15.2 9.3 1 Stress peaks automatic identified by the software. 4. Discussion The null hypothesis was that there would be no difference between the restorative provisional materials for the endocrown biomechanical behavior. The results showed that restorative material influenced the biomechanical behavior of the provisional restorations. Thus, the hypothesis of this study was rejected. It was noticed that the material with the highest elastic modulus allowed less stresses to reach the cement layer, as a consequence of the restoration behavior [6]. In addition, previous investigation also indicated that the less rigid material could be an interesting alternative to perform this treatment modality [8]. This study corroborated both, showing that similar mechanical behavior was observed for the provisional restorative materials evaluated in the present analysis. Besides the use of provisional endocrown being indicated for a short-term period, the restoration performance must be evaluated in order to guarantee all the provisional restoration clinical benefits and because any mechanical problem in the provisional resto-ration may cause discomfort for the patient, as well as financial and economic loss [20]. In this case, results that could suggest higher risk for marginal infiltration or restoration debonding would be valuable [9], since the occurrence of these failures during the usage of a temporary crown could be significant to negatively affect the treatment. According to a systematic review [23], in which the success of the endocrown resto-ration was the primary outcome, the authors calculated a success rate for molars from 72.73% to 99.57% [23]. Moreover, the predominant mode of failure was an adhesive break-down or the restoration debonding [23]. Despite the fact that this review has been per-formed using definitive restorative materials and long-term clinical trials, it showed the Materials 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 12    Figure 8. Tensile stress in the cement layer according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) resin composite.  Figure 9. Maximum shear stress in the cement layer according to the restorative material: (A) acrylic resin, (B) bis-acrylic resin, and (C) resin composite. Table 2. Stress peaks (MPa) obtained in each structure after the analysis processing.1  Acrylic Resin Bis-Acrylic Resin Resin Compo-site Tensile stress in the endocrown 9.6 9.7 10.1 Shear stress in the endocrown 4.2 4.3 4.7 Tensile stress in the cement layer 8.9 8.8 3.4 Shear stress in the cement layer 9.2 9.0 7.5 Tensile stress in the enamel tissue 16.5 16.1 13.4 Tensile stress in the dentin tissue 15.9 15.2 9.3 1 Stress peaks automatic identified by the software. 4. Discussion The null hypothesis was that there would be no difference between the restorative provisional materials for the endocrown biomechanical behavior. The results showed that restorative material influenced the biomechanical behavior of the provisional restorations. Thus, the hypothesis of this study was rejected. It was noticed that the material with the highest elastic modulus allowed less stresses to reach the cement layer, as a consequence of the restoration behavior [6]. In addition, previous investigation also indicated that the less rigid material could be an interesting alternative to perform this treatment modality [8]. This study corroborated both, showing that similar mechanical behavior was observed for the provisional restorative materials evaluated in the present analysis. Besides the use of provisional endocrown being indicated for a short-term period, the restoration performance must be evaluated in order to guarantee all the provisional restoration clinical benefits and because any mechanical problem in the provisional resto-ration may cause discomfort for the patient, as well as financial and economic loss [20]. In this case, results that could suggest higher risk for marginal infiltration or restoration debonding would be valuable [9], since the occurrence of these failures during the usage of a temporary crown could be significant to negatively affect the treatment. According to a systematic review [23], in which the success of the endocrown resto-ration was the primary outcome, the authors calculated a success rate for molars from 72.73% to 99.57% [23]. Moreover, the predominant mode of failure was an adhesive break-down or the restoration debonding [23]. Despite the fact that this review has been per-formed using definitive restorative materials and long-term clinical trials, it showed the Materials 2021, 14, 649

7 of 12

4. Discussion

The null hypothesis was that there would be no difference between the restorative
provisional materials for the endocrown biomechanical behavior. The results showed that
restorative material inﬂuenced the biomechanical behavior of the provisional restorations.
Thus, the hypothesis of this study was rejected. It was noticed that the material with the
highest elastic modulus allowed less stresses to reach the cement layer, as a consequence of
the restoration behavior [6]. In addition, previous investigation also indicated that the less
rigid material could be an interesting alternative to perform this treatment modality [8].
This study corroborated both, showing that similar mechanical behavior was observed for
the provisional restorative materials evaluated in the present analysis.

Besides the use of provisional endocrown being indicated for a short-term period,
the restoration performance must be evaluated in order to guarantee all the provisional
restoration clinical beneﬁts and because any mechanical problem in the provisional restora-
tion may cause discomfort for the patient, as well as ﬁnancial and economic loss [20].
In this case, results that could suggest higher risk for marginal inﬁltration or restoration
debonding would be valuable [9], since the occurrence of these failures during the usage of
a temporary crown could be signiﬁcant to negatively affect the treatment.

According to a systematic review [23], in which the success of the endocrown restora-
tion was the primary outcome, the authors calculated a success rate for molars from 72.73%
to 99.57% [23]. Moreover, the predominant mode of failure was an adhesive breakdown
or the restoration debonding [23]. Despite the fact that this review has been performed
using deﬁnitive restorative materials and long-term clinical trials, it showed the impor-
tance to evaluate the adhesive interface in this restorative modality. Observing the present
results, the use of resin composite could offer to the patient and to the clinician a more
reliable option in terms of marginal misﬁt and adhesive failure risk [24]. According to
the literature [10], comparing different postendodontic treatments, the endocrown is able
to promote higher tensile stress at the cement layer and in dentine, which increases the
risk of failure by debonding [10]. The present study has complemented these ﬁndings,
indicating that the provisional material can affect the endocrown mechanical response and
should be selected in order to reduce the adhesive failure risk. The adhesive failure risk is
proportional to the magnitude of stress concentration in the cement layer, tooth adhesive
area, and restorative material. In addition, the internal adaptation can also be affected
by the restorative material [11], affecting the cement layer thickness and, consequently,
the polymerization shrinkage effect and voids content in it. In this investigation, all ma-
terials were simulated with an ideal ﬁt and contact between the structures, which cannot
occur clinically. Further studies should evaluate the inﬂuence of provisional endocrown
material and manufacturing technique in the internal and marginal ﬁt.

Endocrown margin inﬁltration has been previously evaluated in a 10-year retrospec-
tive evaluation of ceramic and composite endocrowns, the authors reported two cases of
debonding and two cases of caries recurrence from the 99 evaluated cases [25]. Observing
Figure 5, it is possible to observe that the higher the elastic modulus, the lower the defor-
mation results. According to the literature, deformation between tooth and restorative
material could lead to increased hydrodynamic ﬂow and faster secondary caries lesion
formation [26]. In addition, acrylic resin crowns can present a higher marginal discrepancy
in comparison with resin composite provisional crowns due to a higher polymerization
shrinkage effect [27]. Therefore, for the provisional step in the endocrown treatment, the
use of resin composite should be suggested to reduce the endocrown marginal misﬁt
during compressive load.

A previous reported model was used in this study and the remaining tooth presented
1.5 mm of sound enamel to provide adequate bond strength, attempting to preserve the
maximum of the tooth structure [6,8]. It is also important to ensure that the prepared tooth
must be able to be isolated so that optimal bonding protocols can be implemented under a
rubber dam, especially because the debonding risk has been shown to be greater than the
fracture risk [28–30].

Materials 2021, 14, 649

8 of 12

In addition to the residual stress on the adhesive interface, the chewing load can
also affect the mechanical response of the endocrown restoration [8]. In the present study,
an axial load was applied due to the high prevalence of axial load in the molar region.
However, the oblique incidence of chewing loads and cusp heights [9] also can affect the
endocrown mechanical behavior and different occlusal anatomy can promote different
results. However, for the molar region, the high incidence of axial loads in the posterior
region makes the endocrown treatment a reliable modality considering the restoration frac-
ture [12,14]. This study was also in agreement with this reported behavior, since the stress
concentrations in the restoration cross-section and intaglio surface are not very different
between the groups (Figures 3 and 4). This similar stress distributions suggest that all of
them will present a similar failure pattern during compressive tests. During the preparation
design, increasing the restoration occlusal thickness can promote a signiﬁcant improvement
in fracture strength of ceramic endocrowns [29–31]. However, for provisional restorations,
this information is not available in literature yet. Another aspect of the preparation design
is the use of a ﬂat pulp-chamber extension with radicular extension, which can increase
the fracture strength; however, it promotes more unfavorable fracture patterns [29,32].
To ensure an easy preparation, ﬁlling of the pulp chamber with ﬂowable resin composite
should be applied before the provisional endocrown restoration manufacturing, similar to
the present model design.

Another aspect of the endocrown design to think about is the walls of the central
retainer in the endocrown’s pulp-chamber extension promoting an adequate load dissipa-
tion [32]. Therefore, the smoothening of the sharp edge at the base of the pulp chamber
in the preparation for endocrowns is suggested to reduce the stress concentration in the
cervical dentin beneath the endocrown, as well as on the cement layer [33]. This study
followed this approach in the endocrown modelling and showed that the magnitude of
shear stress concentration can be proportional to the restorative material elastic modulus.
The resin composite will demand more bond strength in this region when compared with
the other materials; however; it also has the highest bond strength between all of them.

One of the advantages of the endocrown treatment is that molars restored with en-
docrowns are less prone to root fracture than those with posts [34]. This can be explained
because the stress concentration occurs in the occlusal plane from the prepared abutment
tooth [6–10]. Another aspect is that the stress distributions in the root were similar re-
gardless the ceramic restorative material and different occlusal clearance when indirect
restorations were used [34]. In addition, the present study suggests that the same behavior
could be observed in the abutment tooth when a provisional endocrown was lutted on it;
however, the stress pattern and magnitude were proportional to its elastic modulus. It is
expected restorations that mimic the natural tooth structures will survive longer in oral
conditions [34], and therefore, a biomimetic restoration can provide an adequate stress
distribution [35]. The resin composite group can be suggested for a similar approach in
provisional endocrown restorations (using layering techniques and resin composites with
different ﬁlling contents) allowing the dental technician and dentist to obtain an optimal
provisional endocrown. However, it should be evaluated in further studies, modifying the
endocrown layers’ mechanical behavior.

According to the literature [36], material characteristics may inﬂuence the endocrown’s
margin stability, and for long-term restorations, computer-aided design/computer-aided
manufacturing (CAD/CAM) resin-based composite materials can present a better aspect
of marginal ﬁt than ceramic materials [35]. Therefore, this beneﬁt can also achieved for the
provisional step of the treatment with the resin composite group. Still comparing different
endocrown restorative materials, a previous study evaluated the stress distributions of
endocrown molar models fabricated with ﬁve materials by ﬁnite element method and
load-to-fracture test. Although the authors focused on studying deﬁnitive CAD/CAM
restorations, they concluded that the endocrown fabricated with resin composite exhibited
the best monobloc stress distribution and met the mechanical requirements for large
occlusal areas [37]. In this sense, the resin composite restorative materials seem to be an

Materials 2021, 14, 649

9 of 12

optimal suggestion, even for long-term restorations, corroborating the present study results.
In addition, resin composites are reported to be superior in their ability to maintain constant
deformation without excessive dissipation of stress when compared to acrylic resins [38].
However, for resin composite endocrowns manufactured with a layering technique, this
information is not available in the literature and, therefore, the results should be carefully
extrapolated. In agreement with that, in a previous report [20] that evaluated provisional
restorations, the authors found that the acrylic resin showed a more accurate and precise
marginal adaptation in comparison with bis-acrylic, however they justiﬁed it based in the
CAD/CAM manufacturing method. Therefore, different manufacturing techniques can
modify the mechanical response of endocrowns manufactured with the same restorative
material and should be considered during the treatment plan. Due to the fact that this
is a numerical simulation, the 3D model does not present the defect population in its
structure and a homogeneous material was considered, therefore the digital workﬂow can
produce endocrowns with higher similarity with the present study in comparison with the
analog method.

There are different clinical studies that have reported the use of acrylic resin [15],
resin composite [16], and bis-acrlyc resin [19] as restorative material for the manufacturing
of provisional endocrowns. Until now, there has been no information regarding the
difference between these reported materials. Therefore, the present study suggests that
resin composite should be mechanically more adequate to be used for this indication.
A clinical report asserted that the temporary endocrown restoration could be performed
with self-polymerizing acrylic to promote an adequately adapted gingival margin and to
ensure healthy gingival tissue [39]; however, the authors did not evaluate these properties
in the study and the present study only considered the mechanical response. Therefore,
further clinical trials evaluating the gingival tissue between different interim restorative
materials for endocrown treatment are suggested to elucidate this biological aspect.

A previous study aimed to evaluate and compare the marginal accuracy of interim
restorations made from acrylic resin and bis-acryl resin materials [40]. The authors found
that the bis-acryl group showed a better marginal accuracy than the Polymethyl methacry-
late (PMMA) group. The authors justiﬁed these results based in the higher volumetric
polymerization shrinkage for PMMA (6%) when compared with 1% to 2% for composite
materials [40]. Therefore, the present study complement this information, showing that
even after the polymerization and luting procedure, the marginal deformation will be
affected by the restorative material stiffness.

According to the literature [6,8,18,19], the greater the stiffness of the endocrown
restorative material, the lower the stresses recorded in the tooth structures as well as
the stresses at the interface between these restorations and the dental tissue. This same
pattern has been observed in the present results, corroborating the resin composite material
indication during the provisional manufacturing. As the resin composite endocrown
should be manufactured by CAD/CAM or by layering technique, more time and effort will
be applied in its manufacturing in comparison with the other two provisional materials
(acrylic and bis-acrylic). However, according to the literature [41], an interim restoration,
even for a brief period, will assist the clinician in evaluating the treatment plan and
improving the prognostic accuracy of prosthetic treatment. The initial investment will be
more than repaid in time saved for later procedures, adjustments, and remakes.

The literature reports that endocrowns appear to be a promising conservative restora-
tive modality with acceptable long-term survival for endodontically treated posterior teeth
in selected patients [38]. The present study corroborates with that, showing low stress mag-
nitude regardless the restorative material used in the provisional step. However, because
this is an in silico simulation, some limitations derived from the applied methodology were
present. Initially, the restoration would be subject to variations in temperature and pH in
an oral cavity. In addition, the simulated materials were considered isotropic and do not
present defect populations. Vertical misﬁts of the prostheses were not simulated, as well as
oblique load application, sliding contacts, and operator errors. However, further studies

Materials 2021, 14, 649

10 of 12

should be carried out to complement the present ﬁndings, assisting in elucidating the
provisional endocrown’s biological behavior, fracture load, fatigue survival, and marginal
inﬁltration, as well the marginal and internal adaptation of each material, followed by
clinical studies.

5. Conclusions

In the present study, all provisional restorative materials showed similar stress patterns
in the endocrown. The higher the provisional material elastic modulus, the lower was the
stress concentration in the cement layer. Based on this study limitation, the use of resin
composite to manufacture provisional endocrowns is suggested as a promising material to
reduce the stresses in the cement layer and in the dental tissue adhesive surfaces.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.P.M.T., A.L.S.B., L.R.S.-C., M.A.B., and M.Ö.; method-
ology, J.P.M.T. and A.L.S.B.; software, J.P.M.T., A.L.S.B., and M.A.B.; validation, J.P.M.T., A.L.S.B.,
L.R.S.-C., M.A.B., and M.Ö.; formal analysis, J.P.M.T.; investigation, J.P.M.T.; resources, J.P.M.T.,
A.L.S.B., L.R.S.-C., M.A.B., and M.Ö.; data curation, J.P.M.T., A.L.S.B., and L.R.S.-C.; writing—original
draft preparation, J.P.M.T., A.L.S.B., and L.R.S.-C.; writing—review and editing, J.P.M.T., A.L.S.B.,
and M.Ö.; methodology, J.P.M.T. and A.L.S.B.; visualization, J.P.M.T. and M.Ö.; supervision, M.Ö.;
project administration, J.P.M.T. and M.Ö.; funding acquisition, M.Ö. All authors have read and agreed
to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.

2.

Balkenhol, M.; Mautner, M.C.; Ferger, P.; Wöstmann, B. Mechanical properties of provisional crown and bridge materials:
Chemical-curing versus dual-curing systems. J. Dent. 2008, 36, 15–20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Keys, W.F.; Keirby, N.; Ricketts, D.N.J. Provisional Restorations—A Permanent Problem? Dent. Update 2016, 43, 908–912.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

3. Ha, S.R.; Kim, S.H.; Lee, J.B.; Han, J.S. Improving shear bond strength of temporary crown and ﬁxed dental prosthesis resins by

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

surface treatments. J. Mater. Sci. 2016, 51, 1463–1475. [CrossRef]
Revilla-León, M.; Meyers, M.J.; Zandinejad, A.; Özcan, M. A review on chemical composition, mechanical properties, and
manufacturing work ﬂow of additively manufactured current polymers for interim dental restorations. J. Esthet. Restor. Dent.
2019, 31, 51–57. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shibasaki, S.; Takamizawa, T.; Suzuki, T.; Nojiri, K.; Tsujimoto, A.; Barkmeier, W.W.; Latta, M.A.; Miyazaki, M. Inﬂuence of
Different Curing Modes on Polymerization Behavior and Mechanical Properties of Dual-Cured Provisional Resins. Oper. Dent.
2017, 42, 526–536. [CrossRef]
Tribst, J.P.M.; Dal Piva, A.M.O.; de Jager, N.; Bottino, M.A.; de Kok, P.; Kleverlaan, C.J. Full-Crown Versus Endocrown Approach:
A 3D-Analysis of Both Restorations and the Effect of Ferrule and Restoration Material. J. Prosthodont. 2020, 28. [CrossRef]
Ghoul, W.E.; Özcan, M.; Tribst, J.P.M.; Salameh, Z. Fracture resistance, failure mode and stress concentration in a modiﬁed
endocrown design. Biomater. Investig. Dent. 2020, 7, 110–119. [CrossRef]
Tribst, J.P.M.; Dal Piva, A.M.O.; Madruga, C.F.L.; Valera, M.C.; Borges, A.L.S.; Bresciani, E.; de Melo, R.M. Endocrown restorations:
Inﬂuence of dental remnant and restorative material on stress distribution. Dent. Mater. 2018, 34, 1466–1473. [CrossRef]
Da Fonseca, G.F.; Dal Piva, A.M.; Tribst, J.P.; Borges, A.L. Inﬂuence of Restoration Height and Masticatory Load Orientation on
Ceramic Endocrowns. J. Contemp. Dent. Pract. 2018, 19, 1052–1057. [CrossRef]

10. Da Fonseca, G.F.; de Andrade, G.S.; Dal Piva, A.M.O.; Tribst, J.P.M.; Borges, A.L.S. Computer-aided design ﬁnite element modeling
of different approaches to rehabilitate endodontically treated teeth. J. Indian Prosthodont. Soc. 2018, 18, 329–335. [CrossRef]
11. El Ghoul, W.A.; Özcan, M.; Ounsi, H.; Tohme, H.; Salameh, Z.J. Effect of different CAD-CAM materials on the marginal and
internal adaptation of endocrown restorations: An in vitro study. J. Prosthet. Dent. 2020, 123, 128–134. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. El Ghoul, W.; Özcan, M.; Silwadi, M.; Salameh, Z. Fracture resistance and failure modes of endocrowns manufactured with

different CAD/CAM materials under axial and lateral loading. J. Esthet. Restor. Dent. 2019, 31, 378–387. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Materials 2021, 14, 649

11 of 12

13. Gresnigt, M.M.; Özcan, M.; van den Houten, M.L.; Schipper, L.; Cune, M.S. Fracture strength, failure type and Weibull characteristics of
lithium disilicate and multiphase resin composite endocrowns under axial and lateral forces. Dent. Mater. 2016, 32, 607–614. [CrossRef]
14. Tribst, J.P.; Dal Piva, A.O.; Madruga, C.F.; Valera, M.C.; Bresciani, E.; Bottino, M.A.; de Melo, R.M. The impact of restorative

material and ceramic thickness on CAD\CAM endocrowns. J. Clin. Exp. Dent. 2019, 11, 969–977. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

15. Dogui, H.; Abdelmalek, F.; Amor, A.; Douki, N. Endocrown: An Alternative Approach for Restoring Endodontically Treated

16.

Molars with Large Coronal Destruction. Case. Rep. Dent. 2018, 1581952. [CrossRef]
Irmaleny, Z.; Sholeh, A.; Mardiyah, A.; Agustin, D. Endocrown Restoration on Postendodontics Treatment on Lower First Molar.
J. Int. Soc. Prev. Community Dent. 2019, 9, 303–310.

17. Taha, D.; Abu-Elfadl, A.; Morsi, T. Minimally invasive prosthodontic correction of pseudo class III malocclusion by implementing

a systematic digital workﬂow: A clinical report. J. Prosthet. Dent. 2021, 125, 8–14. [CrossRef]

18. Dejak, B.; Młotkowski, A. A comparison of mvM stress of inlays, onlays and endocrowns made from various materials and their

bonding with molars in a computer simulation of mastication—FEA. Dent. Mater. 2020, 36, 854–864. [CrossRef]

19. Helal, M.A.; Wang, Z. Biomechanical Assessment of Restored Mandibular Molar by Endocrown in Comparison to a Glass Fiber
Post-Retained Conventional Crown: 3D Finite Element Analysis. J. Prosthodont. 2019, 28, 988–996. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Dureja, I.; Yadav, B.; Malhotra, P.; Dabas, N.; Bhargava, A.; Pahwa, R. A comparative evaluation of vertical marginal ﬁt
of provisional crowns fabricated by computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing technique and direct (intraoral
technique) and ﬂexural strength of the materials: An in vitro study. J. Indian Prosthodont. Soc. 2018, 18, 314–320. [CrossRef]
21. Li, X.; Kang, T.; Zhan, D.; Xie, J.; Guo, L. Biomechanical behavior of endocrowns vs ﬁber post-core-crown vs cast post-core-crown
for the restoration of maxillary central incisors with 1 mm and 2 mm ferrule height: A 3D static linear ﬁnite element analysis.
Medicine (Baltimore). 2020, 99, e22648. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

22. Ausiello, P.; Ciaramella, S.; De Benedictis, A.; Lanzotti, A.; Tribst, J.P.M.; Watts, D.C. The use of different adhesive ﬁlling material
and mass combinations to restore class II cavities under loading and shrinkage effects: A 3D-FEA. Comput. Methods Biomech.
Biomed. Eng. 2020, 22, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Srivastava, B.; Devi, N.N.; Gupta, N.; Singh, R. Comparative Evaluation of Various Temperature Changes on Stress Distribution
in Class II Mesial-occlusal-distal Preparation restored with Different Restorative Materials: A Finite Element Analysis. Int. J. Clin.
Pediatr. Dent. 2018, 11, 167–170. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

23.

24. Thomas, R.M.; Kelly, A.; Tagiyeva, N.; Kanagasingam, S. Comparing endocrown restorations on permanent molars and premolars:

A systematic review and meta-analysis. Br. Dent. J. 2020, 12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

25. Belleflamme, M.M.; Geerts, S.O.; Louwette, M.M.; Grenade, C.F.; Vanheusden, A.J.; Mainjot, A.K. No post-no core approach to restore
severely damaged posterior teeth: An up to 10-year retrospective study of documented endocrown cases. J. Dent. 2017, 63, 1–7.
[CrossRef]

26. Hollanders, A.C.C.; Kuper, N.K.; Huysmans, M.C.D.N.J.M.; Versluis, A. The effect of occlusal loading on cervical gap deformation:

A 3D ﬁnite element analysis. Dent. Mater. 2020, 36, 681–686. [CrossRef]

27. Naqash, T.A.; Alfarsi, M.; Hussain, M.W. Marginal accuracy of provisional crowns using three material systems and two

techniques: A scanning electron microscope study. Pak. J. Med. Sci. 2019, 35, 55–60. [CrossRef]

28. Zhang, Y.; Zhao, Y.P. Adhesive Contact of Nanowire in Three-Point Bending Test. J. Adhes. Sci. Technol. 2011, 10, 1107–1129.

[CrossRef]

29. Haralur, S.B.; Alamrey, A.A.; Alshehri, S.A.; Alzahrani, D.S.; Alfarsi, M. Effect of different preparation designs and all ceramic

materials on fracture strength of molar endocrowns. J. Appl. Biomater. Funct. Mater. 2020, 18. [CrossRef]

30. Lin, J.; Lin, Z.; Zheng, Z. Effect of different restorative crown design and materials on stress distribution in endodontically treated

molars: A ﬁnite element analysis study. BMC. Oral. Health 2020, 18, 226. [CrossRef]

31. Govare, N.; Contrepois, M. Endocrowns: A systematic review. J. Prosthet. Dent. 2020, 123, 411–418. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Zhu, J.; Wang, D.; Rong, Q.; Qian, J.; Wang, X. Effect of central retainer shape and abduction angle during preparation of teeth
on dentin and cement layer stress distributions in endocrown-restored mandibular molars. Dent. Mater. J. 2020, 5, 464–470.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

33. Eskita¸sçio ˘glu, M.; Küçük, O.; Eskita¸sçio ˘glu, G.; Eraslan, O.; Belli, S. The Effect of Different Materials and Techniques on Stress

Distribution in CAD/CAM Endocrowns. Strength Mater. 2020, 52, 812–819. [CrossRef]

34. Yamaguchi, S.; Kani, R.; Kawakami, K.; Tsuji, M.; Inoue, S.; Lee, C.; Kiba, W.; Imazato, S. Fatigue behavior and crack initiation of

CAD/CAM resin composite molar crowns. Dent. Mater. 2018, 34, 1578–1584. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

35. Penteado, M.M.; Tribst, J.P.M.; Dal Piva, A.M.; Ausiello, P.; Zarone, F.; Garcia-Godoy, F.; Borges, A.L. Mechanical behavior of

conceptual posterior dental crowns with functional elasticity gradient. Am. J. Dent. 2019, 32, 165–168.

36. Zimmermann, M.; Valcanaia, A.; Neiva, G.; Mehl, A.; Fasbinder, D. Three-Dimensional Digital Evaluation of the Fit of Endocrowns

Fabricated from Different CAD/CAM Materials. J. Prosthodont. 2019, 28, 504–509. [CrossRef]

37. Zheng, Z.; He, Y.; Ruan, W.; Ling, Z.; Zheng, C.; Gai, Y.; Yan, W. Biomechanical behavior of endocrown restorations with different

CAD-CAM materials: A 3D ﬁnite element and in vitro analysis. J. Prosthet. Dent. 2020, 26. [CrossRef]

38. Al-Dabbagh, R.A. Survival and success of endocrowns: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Prosthet. Dent. 2020, 17.

[CrossRef]

39. Biacchi, G.R.; Mello, B.; Basting, R.T. The endocrown: An alternative approach for restoring extensively damaged molars. J. Esthet.

Restor. Dent. 2013, 25, 383–390. [CrossRef]

Materials 2021, 14, 649

12 of 12

40. Madhavan, S.; Jude, S.M.; Achammada, S.; Ullattuthodi, S.; Kuriachan, T.; Jacob, J. Comparison of Marginal Accuracy of Interim
Restoration Fabricated from Self-cure Composite and Autopolymerizing Acrylic Resin: An In Vitro Study. J. Pharm. Bioallied Sci.
2020, 12, S361–S366. [CrossRef]

41. Miura, S.; Fujisawa, M.; Komine, F.; Maseki, T.; Ogawa, T.; Takebe, J.; Nara, Y. Importance of interim restorations in the molar

region. J. Oral Sci. 2019, 18, 195–199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

