Article
Research on Characterization of Nylon Composites Functional
Material Filled with Al2O3 Particle
Jibing Chen 1,*

, Bowen Liu 1, Maohui Hu 1, Qianyu Shi 1, Junsheng Chen 1, Junsheng Yang 1 and Yiping Wu 2

1

2

School of Mechanical Engineering, Wuhan Polytechnic University, Wuhan 430023, China;
kysdmbylbw@163.com (B.L.); hmhwhqgdx@163.com (M.H.); 15965826765@163.com (Q.S.);
chenjs9610@163.com (J.C.); yangjunsheng2008@163.com (J.Y.)
School of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan 430074, China; ypwu@mail.hust.edu.cn

* Correspondence: jbchen@whpu.edu.cn

Abstract: This study revolves around the issues raised by the current semiconductor device metal
casings (mainly composed of aluminum and its alloys), such as resource and energy consumption,
complexity of the production process, and environmental pollution. To address these issues, re-
searchers have proposed an eco-friendly and high-performance alternative material—Al2O3 particle-
ﬁlled nylon composite functional material. This research conducted detailed characterization and
analysis of the composite material through scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC). The results show that the Al2O3 particle-ﬁlled nylon composite material
has a signiﬁcantly superior thermal conductivity, about twice as high as that of pure nylon mate-
rial. Meanwhile, the composite material has good thermal stability, maintaining its performance in
high-temperature environments above 240 ◦C. This performance is attributed to the tight bonding
interface between the Al2O3 particles and the nylon matrix, which not only improves the heat transfer
efﬁciency but also signiﬁcantly enhances the material’s mechanical properties, with a strength of
up to 53 MPa. This study is of great signiﬁcance, aiming to provide a high-performance composite
material that can alleviate resource consumption and environmental pollution issues, with excellent
polishability, thermal conductivity, and moldability, which is expected to play a positive role in
reducing resource consumption and environmental pollution problems. In terms of potential applica-
tions, Al2O3/PA6 composite material can be widely used in heat dissipation components for LED
semiconductor lighting and other high-temperature heat dissipation components, thereby improving
product performance and service life, reducing energy consumption and environmental burden,
and laying a solid foundation for the development and application of future high-performance
eco-friendly materials.

Keywords: PA6/Al2O3 composite; functional material; microstructure; mechanical property

1. Introduction

With the miniaturization, integration, high-density, and high-speed development of
electronic components, heat dissipation has become a very serious problem [1], especially
as various light-emitting diodes (LEDs) are widely used in various places for urban lighting.
High-power and high-brightness LEDs generate a tremendous amount of heat, making it
challenging to maintain the optimal operating temperature range of 25–30 ◦C for LEDs.
Traditional inorganic thermally conductive materials such as metals and ceramics can
no longer meet the needs of further development of electronic products, and new high-
efﬁciency thermally conductive materials must be used to dissipate heat promptly [2].
Polymer-based composite materials refer to the introduction of one or more inorganic
or organic materials with speciﬁc properties into the polymer matrix through various
processing methods (including chemical and physical means) so that the polymer also
has some special properties, such as thermal conductivity, shielding of electromagnetic

Citation: Chen, J.; Liu, B.; Hu, M.;

Shi, Q.; Chen, J.; Yang, J.; Wu, Y.

Research on Characterization of

Nylon Composites Functional

Material Filled with Al2O3 Particle.

Polymers 2023, 15, 2369. https://

doi.org/10.3390/polym15102369

Academic Editor: S. D. Jacob Muthu

Received: 15 April 2023

Revised: 15 May 2023

Accepted: 17 May 2023

Published: 19 May 2023

Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Polymers 2023, 15, 2369. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym15102369

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/polymers

polymersPolymers 2023, 15, 2369

2 of 10

waves, dielectric properties, electrical conductivity, and excellent damping performance [3].
Thermally conductive polymer composites have excellent thermal conductivity and unpar-
alleled molding processability, electrical insulation, and corrosion resistance of traditional
inorganic thermally conductive materials [4], becoming a research hotspot in the ﬁeld of
polymer materials.

The thermal conductivity of metals mainly relies on freely moving electrons, and the
heat transfer mechanism is the formation of a heat conduction band using unconstrained
electrons that can move freely; the thermal conductivity of inorganic non-metallic materials
can only be conducted through the microscopic structure of mutual contact between mate-
rial molecules by transferring phonons, using phonons as heat transfer carriers to transfer
heat. Phonons are mechanical waves generated by lattice vibrations in crystals (mainly
vibrations of atoms, molecules, and groups) [5,6], which are successively transferred be-
tween material molecules, so their thermal conductivity efﬁciency is not as good as that of
free electrons. In contrast, polymers themselves are composed of molecular chains with
very large molecular weights, and it is difﬁcult to form a free electron energy band inside
the material. Therefore, polymers mainly transfer heat through mutual contact between
microscopic structures. However, unlike the phonon thermal conductivity of inorganic
non-metallic materials, polymers themselves are composed of mixtures of homologous
substances with different molecular weights, with larger van der Waals forces between
molecular chains and longer chains that are prone to entanglement at the ends, resulting in
more defects between the molecules. Therefore, polymer materials are particularly prone
to phonon scattering, leading to low heat transfer efﬁciency and poor thermal conductivity
of polymer materials [7]. Currently, there are two main approaches to preparing thermally
conductive composite materials [8]: intrinsically thermally conductive polymer composites
with inherent heat transfer capabilities, and ﬁller-based thermally conductive polymer
composites using externally added ﬁllers. Intrinsic thermally conductive polymer materials
have a large number of conjugated structures in their molecular chains and a relatively
large proportion of crystalline regions, and these special structures give the polymer itself
good heat transfer capabilities [9]. When phonons propagate in these polymers, there is
less phonon scattering and hindrance, making intrinsic thermally conductive polymer
composites excellent thermal conductors. However, the processing technology of intrinsic
thermally conductive polymers is very complex, from the selection of initiators and the
initiation of active polymer monomers, to the inﬂuence of reaction temperature and reac-
tion time. These factors make the preparation of intrinsic thermally conductive polymers
extremely difﬁcult and the industrial production and processing difﬁcult [10]. Therefore,
based on the modern Fourier solid heat conduction theory, inorganic powders with strong
heat transfer capabilities are ﬁlled into polymers to prepare high thermally conductive base
polymer materials that meet the needs of the actual operating environment.

At present, a large number of studies have been conducted both domestically and
abroad, aiming to develop composite functional materials with high thermal conductiv-
ity. Joao Paulo Berenguer, Arielle Berman, and other scholars [11] studied the effects of
polyethylene ﬁllers on the thermal conductivity, mechanical properties, and processability
of all-polymer high thermal conductivity composite materials. Through thermal conductiv-
ity tests, tensile tests, bending tests, and impact tests, the results showed that optimizing the
mass fraction and dispersion degree of polyethylene ﬁllers can achieve a comprehensive
optimization of the thermal conductivity, mechanical properties, and processability of
all-polymer high thermal conductivity composite materials. Guorui Zhang, Sen Xue, and
others [12] developed a high-efﬁciency thermal interface material with anisotropic orienta-
tion and high vertical thermal conductivity, by adjusting the distribution and orientation
of graphene ﬁllers, improving the thermal management performance of microelectronic
devices, extending device life, and improving energy efﬁciency. You Y-L, Li D-X, and oth-
ers [13] prepared GF/PA6 composite materials containing different solid lubricants in the
laboratory, and used a ball-disc friction tester to evaluate the friction and wear performance
of different composite materials, revealing the mechanism of various solid lubricants in

Polymers 2023, 15, 2369

3 of 10

reducing friction and wear. One paper [14] mainly studied the thermal conductivity of
polymer composite materials based on phenolic resin and boron nitride (BN), by adding
boron nitride ﬁllers to phenolic resin, improving the thermal conductivity of composite
materials, and evaluating the thermal conductivity, thermal stability, and microstructure
of composite materials through thermal conductivity tests, thermogravimetric analysis,
and scanning electron microscopy. Another [15] analyzed the microstructure, thermal
stability, and mechanical properties of Al2O3 and SiC-reinforced PA6 hybrid composite
materials, and the experimental results showed that Al2O3 and SiC particles were uni-
formly distributed in the PA6 matrix, effectively improving the mechanical properties of the
materials. Jiaqi Zhang, Xianzhao Jia, and others [16] mainly studied the effects of additive
ﬂuoroelastomer (FVMQ) and Al2O3 particle co-ﬁlling on its mechanical properties, thermal
properties, and friction properties at high temperatures, verifying that by optimizing the
mass fraction and dispersion degree of Al2O3 particle ﬁllers, a comprehensive optimization
of the mechanical properties, thermal properties, and friction properties of ﬂuoroelastomer
composite materials under high-temperature conditions can be achieved. Qiu Hong Mu,
Dan Peng, and other scholars [17] studied the effect of ﬁlling Al2O3 particles on the thermal
conductivity of silicone rubber, and evaluated the thermal conductivity, thermal stability,
and microstructure of composite materials through thermal conductivity tests, thermogravi-
metric analysis, and scanning electron microscopy. One work [18] explored the effects of
ﬁlling Al2O3 compounds on the thermal conductivity and rheological properties of epoxy
resin and liquid crystal epoxy resin composite materials, by adding Al2O= compound ﬁllers
to epoxy resin and liquid crystal epoxy resin, improving the thermal conductivity and
rheological properties of composite materials. Konopka K, Krasnowski M, and others [19]
used pulsed plasma sintering (PPS) method to prepare Al2O3 samples and NiAl-Al2O3
composite materials, and analyzed the microstructure, phase composition, thermal stability,
and mechanical properties of the two materials by X-ray diffraction (XRD), thermogravi-
metric analysis (TGA), and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and evaluated the
signiﬁcant inﬂuence of pulsed plasma sintering parameters on the microstructure and
mechanical properties

According to the literature cited above, a series of research work has been carried
out on thermal conductive materials for semiconductor devices. In order to ensure that
these thermal conductive materials have excellent comprehensive performance, researchers
usually choose to ﬁll polymer materials with high thermal conductivity inorganic ﬁllers or
metal ﬁllers. The thermal conductive materials prepared in this way have the advantages
of low cost and easy processing. Through appropriate physical and chemical treatment
methods or adjusting the experimental formula ratio, such thermal conductive materials
can meet the speciﬁc application scenarios with thermal conductivity requirements. PA6
has good mechanical properties, thermal stability, and chemical stability, and can adapt
to various complex working environments. More importantly, PA6 has high adjustabil-
ity, and its performance can be improved by adding different types and proportions of
ﬁllers, reinforcements, and auxiliaries. Therefore, this study chose to add inorganic ﬁllers
(Al2O3) to nylon (PA6) and add 5% diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) in a certain proportion
to prepare materials with speciﬁc functions. In order to study the mechanical properties
of these functional materials, various instruments such as scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) (JSM-7500F, JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) (1/700
type, Mettler-Toledo, Zurich, Switzerland), and thermal conductivity meter (DTC-300,
TA Instruments, New Castle, DE, USA) were used for testing and analysis. The results
show that this high thermal conductivity functional material has great potential to replace
metal shell materials and can be used to manufacture semiconductor devices with a metal
appearance. This material performs excellently in polishing performance, thermal con-
ductivity, and molding performance, providing promising possibilities for replacing metal
materials. For example, in LED semiconductor lighting, it can be used as an effective heat
dissipation material.

Polymers 2023, 15, 2369

4 of 10

2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Raw Materials

The thermally conductive base material nylon (PA6) was purchased from Zhuhai SMIKA
Polymer Company (Zhuhai, China); the thermally conductive filler Al2O3 (purity ≥ 99%) was
obtained from National Medicine Group Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China);
the coupling agent diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) was provided by Foshan New Material
Technology Co., Ltd. (Foshan, China).

2.2. Preparation of Materials

Initially, the nylon plastic granules underwent essential pretreatment. The nylon
granules were dried in an oven at a temperature of 120 ◦C for 24 h to eliminate moisture,
ensuring the stability of material performance in subsequent experiments.

In this study, we conducted three sets of experiments. Firstly, to achieve a good thermal
conductivity, thermal stability, and mechanical properties, we combined the research from
ref. [20,21] and prior theoretical analysis. Nylon PA6, thermal conductive ﬁller Al2O3, and
DEHP were mixed at a mass ratio of 80:18:2. A high-speed stirrer was used to ensure that
all components were fully mixed and formed a homogeneous mixture. Subsequently, the
obtained mixture was extruded using an extruder to give the material a certain shape. The
extruded material was then dried at 80 ◦C for 2 h to remove any residual moisture, ensuring
the smooth progress of the subsequent injection molding process.

Secondly, with the aforementioned experimental procedure kept consistent, we con-
ducted grouped experiments with ﬁller particle size, ﬁller shape, and ﬁller ratio as variables
to evaluate the thermal performance of the material. The particle sizes selected were 5 µm,
20 µm, and 100 µm; the ﬁller shapes were spherical and ﬂaky; the ﬁller ratios were 10%,
20%, 30%, 40%, and 50%.

Lastly, to analyze the relationship between the ﬁller ratio and mechanical properties
in more detail, we set up nine groups of gradient experiments for the ﬁller ratio, namely
0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, and 40%, while maintaining the aforementioned
experimental procedure.

2.3. Characterization of Thermal Conductivity

After the experiment was completed, we immersed the samples used for testing
thermal performance in liquid nitrogen, allowing them to rapidly solidify and become
brittle at low temperatures, thus facilitating subsequent cross-sectional observation and
analysis. Then, the cross-section of the sample was placed on conductive adhesive and
a sputter coating treatment performed to provide good conductivity and adhesion for
observation and analysis under a scanning electron microscope (SEM). The SEM was used
to observe the distribution characteristics and morphology of the thermally conductive ﬁller
in the matrix material. Finally, the prepared heat-resistant plastic samples were sent to a
differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) for heat resistance performance analysis. We sought
to understand the thermal stability and thermal degradation behavior of the composite
material at different temperatures, thereby evaluating its application potential in high-
temperature environments. Furthermore, we employed a thermal conductivity meter to
analyze the samples. By applying heat to the sample and measuring its temperature change
over a certain period, we calculated the sample’s thermal conductivity, which allowed us
to predict the material’s thermal management performance in practical applications.

2.4. Mechanical Analysis

In this study, tensile tests were conducted to evaluate the mechanical properties of
the composite material, using an electronic universal testing machine (WDT-10, Shenzhen
Kaiqiangli Experimental Instrument Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China.) with a testing temperature
of 25 ◦C. To ensure the accuracy and comparability of the experiments, the preparation
and testing process of the tensile samples followed the relevant provisions of ASTM
D638. Meanwhile, the size of the samples referred to the ISO 527-2 Type 1A standard

Polymers 2023, 15, 2369

5 of 10

requirements to ensure that the shape and dimensions of the samples met internationally
accepted requirements. In the actual testing process, the samples were stretched at a
transverse speed of 25 mm/min to simulate the loading speed and conditions that may be
encountered in real-life applications. Finally, the American TA Instruments (New Castle,
DE, USA) Q800 analyzer was used for single cantilever mode testing, gaining a deeper
understanding of the mechanical properties of the composite material and its potential in
various application scenarios.

2.5. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM)

A scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to study the microstructure of PA6,
Al2O3, and the composite material. Observing the microstructure and interactions within
PA6, Al2O3, and their composite material helps to reveal the microstructural characteristics
of the samples.

3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Microstructure Analysis of Thermal Polymer Materials

In order to measure the thermal conductivity, the test samples were ﬁrst treated with
liquid nitrogen to increase the brittleness of the material. Subsequently, the cross-section
of the samples was placed on a conductive adhesive and subjected to sputter coating,
enabling observation of the distribution characteristics and morphology of the thermally
conductive ﬁllers within the matrix material under a scanning electron microscope (SEM).
Following this step, we utilized a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) to analyze the
thermal stability of the heat-resistant plastic samples to understand their performance under
high-temperature conditions. Prior to the formal preparation of thermally conductive
polymer materials, a detailed examination of the microstructure and energy spectrum
distribution of the ﬁllers and PA6 was conducted using a scanning electron microscope,
based on the composition ratio of the thermally conductive ﬁllers. The results are shown in
Figures 1 and 2.

Figure 1. PA6 material microstructure image.

After successfully preparing the thermally conductive composite material, its mi-
crostructure was observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM), as shown in
Figure 3. Comparing Figures 1 and 3, it can be found that the SEM image of the original
PA6 displays a relatively uniform and smooth surface, while the SEM image of the PA6
composite material with added Al2O3 ﬁller exhibits a clear distribution of ﬁller particles
and an interfacial region is formed between the Al2O3 ﬁller and the PA6 matrix. Further-
more, the thermally conductive ﬁller (Al2O3) appears as ﬂake-like or spherical shapes and
is relatively uniformly distributed within the nylon matrix material, which is beneﬁcial for

Polymers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 11   2.4. Mechanical Analysis In this study, tensile tests were conducted to evaluate the mechanical properties of the composite material, using an electronic universal testing machine (WDT-10, Shenzhen Kaiqiangli Experimental Instrument Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China.) with a testing tempera-ture of 25 °C. To ensure the accuracy and comparability of the experiments, the prepara-tion and testing process of the tensile samples followed the relevant provisions of ASTM D638. Meanwhile, the size of the samples referred to the ISO 527-2 Type 1A standard re-quirements to ensure that the shape and dimensions of the samples met internationally accepted requirements. In the actual testing process, the samples were stretched at a trans-verse speed of 25 mm/min to simulate the loading speed and conditions that may be en-countered in real-life applications. Finally, the American TA Instruments (New Castle, DE, USA) Q800 analyzer was used for single cantilever mode testing, gaining a deeper under-standing of the mechanical properties of the composite material and its potential in vari-ous application scenarios. 2.5. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) A scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to study the microstructure of PA6, Al2O3, and the composite material. Observing the microstructure and interactions within PA6, Al2O3, and their composite material helps to reveal the microstructural characteris-tics of the samples. 3. Results and Discussion 3.1. Microstructure Analysis of Thermal Polymer Materials In order to measure the thermal conductivity, the test samples were first treated with liquid nitrogen to increase the brittleness of the material. Subsequently, the cross-section of the samples was placed on a conductive adhesive and subjected to sputter coating, en-abling observation of the distribution characteristics and morphology of the thermally conductive fillers within the matrix material under a scanning electron microscope (SEM). Following this step, we utilized a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) to analyze the thermal stability of the heat-resistant plastic samples to understand their performance un-der high-temperature conditions. Prior to the formal preparation of thermally conductive polymer materials, a detailed examination of the microstructure and energy spectrum dis-tribution of the fillers and PA6 was conducted using a scanning electron microscope, based on the composition ratio of the thermally conductive fillers. The results are shown in Figures 1 and 2.  Figure 1. PA6 material microstructure image. Polymers 2023, 15, 2369

6 of 10

forming continuous thermal conduction paths or networks within the composite material.
After the addition of the thermally conductive ﬁller, the original microstructure of the ma-
trix material changes, resulting in the thermally conductive composite material exhibiting
excellent thermal conductivity performance.

Figure 2. Al2O3 energy spectrum analysis image.

Figure 3. Figure 3. SEM photographs of nylon composites: (a) 500 µm; (b) 100 µm.

3.2. DSC Testing

In this study, the thermal properties of the thermally conductive polymer samples
were analyzed using a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC). During the experiment, the
samples were placed in a nitrogen atmosphere and heated at a rate of 20 ◦C per minute,
with the temperature increasing from room temperature to 300 ◦C. After reaching 300 ◦C,
the temperature was maintained at 10 ◦C for 10 min, followed by cooling. The obtained
DSC curve of the samples is shown in Figure 4. Based on the results in Figure 4, the entire
DSC curve can be divided into four stages [22]. In the ﬁrst stage, from the start of heating
to approximately 160 ◦C, the DSC curve gradually rises and reaches the peak of the ﬁrst
endothermic peak; at this temperature, the polymer transitions from a glassy state to a
highly elastic rubber-like or viscous ﬂuid state, and the motion of the molecular chains
becomes more ﬂexible. The subsequent second stage extends from the end of the 160 ◦C
endothermic peak to a temperature of 175 ◦C. The third stage has a temperature range of
175 ◦C to 240 ◦C, where the curve starts to rise, ultimately forming the second endothermic
peak; at this temperature, the crystalline regions of PA6 begin to melt, and the movement
of the molecular chains further increases. The ﬁnal fourth stage covers a temperature range
of 230 ◦C to 300 ◦C, during which the DSC curve begins to decline and exhibits a faster

Polymers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 11    Figure 2. Al2O3 energy spectrum analysis image. After successfully preparing the thermally conductive composite material, its micro-structure was observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM), as shown in Figure 3. Comparing Figures 1 and 3, it can be found that the SEM image of the original PA6 displays a relatively uniform and smooth surface, while the SEM image of the PA6 com-posite material with added Al2O3 filler exhibits a clear distribution of filler particles and an interfacial region is formed between the Al2O3 filler and the PA6 matrix. Furthermore, the thermally conductive filler (Al2O3) appears as flake-like or spherical shapes and is rel-atively uniformly distributed within the nylon matrix material, which is beneficial for forming continuous thermal conduction paths or networks within the composite material. After the addition of the thermally conductive filler, the original microstructure of the matrix material changes, resulting in the thermally conductive composite material exhib-iting excellent thermal conductivity performance.   (a) (b) Figure 3. SEM photographs of nylon composites: (a) 500 μm; (b) 100 μm. 3.2. DSC Testing In this study, the thermal properties of the thermally conductive polymer samples were analyzed using a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC). During the experiment, the samples were placed in a nitrogen atmosphere and heated at a rate of 20 °C per minute, with the temperature increasing from room temperature to 300 °C. After reaching 300 °C, the temperature was maintained at 10 °C for 10 min, followed by cooling. The obtained DSC curve of the samples is shown in Figure 4. Based on the results in Figure 4, the entire DSC curve can be divided into four stages [22]. In the first stage, from the start of heating to approximately 160 °C, the DSC curve gradually rises and reaches the peak of the first Polymers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 11    Figure 2. Al2O3 energy spectrum analysis image. After successfully preparing the thermally conductive composite material, its micro-structure was observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM), as shown in Figure 3. Comparing Figures 1 and 3, it can be found that the SEM image of the original PA6 displays a relatively uniform and smooth surface, while the SEM image of the PA6 com-posite material with added Al2O3 filler exhibits a clear distribution of filler particles and an interfacial region is formed between the Al2O3 filler and the PA6 matrix. Furthermore, the thermally conductive filler (Al2O3) appears as flake-like or spherical shapes and is rel-atively uniformly distributed within the nylon matrix material, which is beneficial for forming continuous thermal conduction paths or networks within the composite material. After the addition of the thermally conductive filler, the original microstructure of the matrix material changes, resulting in the thermally conductive composite material exhib-iting excellent thermal conductivity performance.   (a) (b) Figure 3. SEM photographs of nylon composites: (a) 500 μm; (b) 100 μm. 3.2. DSC Testing In this study, the thermal properties of the thermally conductive polymer samples were analyzed using a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC). During the experiment, the samples were placed in a nitrogen atmosphere and heated at a rate of 20 °C per minute, with the temperature increasing from room temperature to 300 °C. After reaching 300 °C, the temperature was maintained at 10 °C for 10 min, followed by cooling. The obtained DSC curve of the samples is shown in Figure 4. Based on the results in Figure 4, the entire DSC curve can be divided into four stages [22]. In the first stage, from the start of heating to approximately 160 °C, the DSC curve gradually rises and reaches the peak of the first Polymers 2023, 15, 2369

7 of 10

descent rate; in this process, heat is released, and the polymer material’s chain segments
begin to rearrange and form crystalline regions.

Figure 4. DSC curves of thermally conductive polymers. (I) Glass transition phase; (II) Thermal
stabilization phase; (III) Melting phase; (IV) Crystallization phase.

3.3. Thermal Conductivity Testing

In this project, we conducted experiments on the thermal conductivity of polymer
materials prepared based on Al2O3 with different diameters and morphologies. The
diameters of the ﬁllers used were 5 µm, 20 µm, and 100 µm, and the morphologies included
spherical and ﬂake-like shapes. Figure 5 shows the corresponding experimental data
curves. Combining the experimental data with the literature [23], several conclusions can
be drawn: (1) Under different diameters or different morphologies of the ﬁller, the thermal
conductivity of the polymer materials exhibits an increasing trend, indicating that the
thermal conductivity of nylon composites increases with the increase in the content of
Al2O3 ﬁller. This phenomenon can be attributed to the increase in ﬁller content, which
helps form thermal conduction paths and networks in the composite material, thereby
improving thermal conductivity; (2) By observing the data curves of the three groups
with ﬁller diameters of 5 µm, 20 µm, and 100 µm, it can be concluded that the thermal
conductivity is the highest when the ﬁller diameter is 20 µm and the lowest when the ﬁller
diameter is 100 µm. This indicates that within a speciﬁc particle size range, the thermal
conductivity of the composite material increases with the increase in particle size; however,
beyond this range, the thermal conductivity gradually decreases. This phenomenon may
be due to the larger particle size ﬁller reducing the thermal conductivity of the composite
material, leading to a decrease in overall thermal conductivity; (3) Comparing the data of
spherical and ﬂake-like ﬁllers with a diameter of 5 µm, it can be found that the ﬂake-like
ﬁllers are more effective in improving the thermal conductivity of the composite material
than spherical ﬁllers.

Figure 5. The thermal conductivity of spherical and ﬂaky Al2O3 ﬁlled with nylon composites with 5,
20, and 100 µm particles.

Polymers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 11   endothermic peak; at this temperature, the polymer transitions from a glassy state to a highly elastic rubber-like or viscous fluid state, and the motion of the molecular chains becomes more flexible. The subsequent second stage extends from the end of the 160 °C endothermic peak to a temperature of 175 °C. The third stage has a temperature range of 175 °C to 240 °C, where the curve starts to rise, ultimately forming the second endothermic peak; at this temperature, the crystalline regions of PA6 begin to melt, and the movement of the molecular chains further increases. The final fourth stage covers a temperature range of 230 °C to 300 °C, during which the DSC curve begins to decline and exhibits a faster descent rate; in this process, heat is released, and the polymer material’s chain seg-ments begin to rearrange and form crystalline regions.  Figure 4. DSC curves of thermally conductive polymers. (Ⅰ) Glass transition phase; (Ⅱ) Thermal stabilization phase; (Ⅲ) Melting phase; (Ⅳ) Crystallization phase. 3.3. Thermal Conductivity Testing In this project, we conducted experiments on the thermal conductivity of polymer materials prepared based on Al2O3 with different diameters and morphologies. The diam-eters of the fillers used were 5 μm, 20 μm, and 100 μm, and the morphologies included spherical and flake-like shapes. Figure 5 shows the corresponding experimental data curves. Combining the experimental data with the literature [23], several conclusions can be drawn: (1) Under different diameters or different morphologies of the filler, the thermal conductivity of the polymer materials exhibits an increasing trend, indicating that the thermal conductivity of nylon composites increases with the increase in the content of Al2O3 filler. This phenomenon can be attributed to the increase in filler content, which helps form thermal conduction paths and networks in the composite material, thereby improving thermal conductivity; (2) By observing the data curves of the three groups with filler diameters of 5 μm, 20 μm, and 100 μm, it can be concluded that the thermal conduc-tivity is the highest when the filler diameter is 20 μm and the lowest when the filler diam-eter is 100 μm. This indicates that within a specific particle size range, the thermal con-ductivity of the composite material increases with the increase in particle size; however, beyond this range, the thermal conductivity gradually decreases. This phenomenon may be due to the larger particle size filler reducing the thermal conductivity of the composite material, leading to a decrease in overall thermal conductivity; (3) Comparing the data of spherical and flake-like fillers with a diameter of 5 μm, it can be found that the flake-like fillers are more effective in improving the thermal conductivity of the composite material than spherical fillers. Polymers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 11    Figure 5. The thermal conductivity of spherical and flaky Al2O3 filled with nylon composites with 5, 20, and 100 μm particles. 3.4. Mechanical Properties Testing Figure 6 shows the change curve of the tensile strength of composite materials as the content of Al2O3 filler increases. According to the experimental data curve, the tensile strength of nylon is 46 MPa. When the alumina content reaches 14%, the tensile strength of the composite material reaches its maximum value of 55.1 MPa, which is about 19% higher than that of pure nylon material. However, when the alumina filler content exceeds 14%, the tensile strength of the composite material significantly decreases, showing an inverse relationship with the proportion of filler. When the alumina content reaches 30%, the tensile strength is 35.5 MPa. This observation indicates that the tensile strength of the composite material increases with the increase in alumina content within a specific range (alumina content below 10%). When the content is below this range, its tensile strength is even lower than that of single nylon material.  Figure 6. Tensile strength curves of alumina/nylon composites. ■ denotes the tensile strength at various filler percentages. With the addition of alumina filler, the compressive strength of nylon composite ma-terials has been improved accordingly. An electronic universal testing machine was used to measure the compressive strength of composite materials, and the experimental results are shown in Figure 7. When the alumina content reaches 15%, the compressive strength Polymers 2023, 15, 2369

8 of 10

3.4. Mechanical Properties Testing

Figure 6 shows the change curve of the tensile strength of composite materials as the
content of Al2O3 ﬁller increases. According to the experimental data curve, the tensile
strength of nylon is 46 MPa. When the alumina content reaches 14%, the tensile strength
of the composite material reaches its maximum value of 55.1 MPa, which is about 19%
higher than that of pure nylon material. However, when the alumina ﬁller content exceeds
14%, the tensile strength of the composite material signiﬁcantly decreases, showing an
inverse relationship with the proportion of ﬁller. When the alumina content reaches 30%,
the tensile strength is 35.5 MPa. This observation indicates that the tensile strength of the
composite material increases with the increase in alumina content within a speciﬁc range
(alumina content below 10%). When the content is below this range, its tensile strength is
even lower than that of single nylon material.

Figure 6. Tensile strength curves of alumina/nylon composites. (cid:4) denotes the tensile strength at
various ﬁller percentages.

With the addition of alumina ﬁller, the compressive strength of nylon composite
materials has been improved accordingly. An electronic universal testing machine was
used to measure the compressive strength of composite materials, and the experimental
results are shown in Figure 7. When the alumina content reaches 15%, the compressive
strength of the composite material reaches its highest value of 94 MPa. Compared with pure
PA6, the compressive strength of this composite material has increased by 47.6%. Within
a certain range (alumina content ≤ 15%), the compressive strength of nylon composite
materials increases with the increase in alumina content. This trend can be attributed to the
dispersion of alumina particles in the polymer matrix and the interaction between alumina
particles and the polymer matrix [24]. However, when the alumina content exceeds this
threshold, the excessive ﬁller content leads to particle aggregation in the polymer matrix,
which affects the overall performance of the composite material, resulting in a decreasing
trend in compressive strength.

Polymers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 11    Figure 5. The thermal conductivity of spherical and flaky Al2O3 filled with nylon composites with 5, 20, and 100 μm particles. 3.4. Mechanical Properties Testing Figure 6 shows the change curve of the tensile strength of composite materials as the content of Al2O3 filler increases. According to the experimental data curve, the tensile strength of nylon is 46 MPa. When the alumina content reaches 14%, the tensile strength of the composite material reaches its maximum value of 55.1 MPa, which is about 19% higher than that of pure nylon material. However, when the alumina filler content exceeds 14%, the tensile strength of the composite material significantly decreases, showing an inverse relationship with the proportion of filler. When the alumina content reaches 30%, the tensile strength is 35.5 MPa. This observation indicates that the tensile strength of the composite material increases with the increase in alumina content within a specific range (alumina content below 10%). When the content is below this range, its tensile strength is even lower than that of single nylon material.  Figure 6. Tensile strength curves of alumina/nylon composites. ■ denotes the tensile strength at various filler percentages. With the addition of alumina filler, the compressive strength of nylon composite ma-terials has been improved accordingly. An electronic universal testing machine was used to measure the compressive strength of composite materials, and the experimental results are shown in Figure 7. When the alumina content reaches 15%, the compressive strength Polymers 2023, 15, 2369

9 of 10

Figure 7. Compressive strength curve of Al2O3/nylon composites. (cid:78) denotes the compressive
strength at various ﬁller percentages.

4. Conclusions

In this paper, researchers successfully prepared a composite material with high thermal
conductivity using high thermal conductive functional materials, namely polyamide 6
(PA6) and alumina (Al2O3). Detailed experimental studies were conducted on the thermal
conductivity, heat resistance, and performance at different ﬁller ratios of this composite
material. The experimental results show that: (1) using spherical ﬁllers with a diameter of
20 µm can achieve a larger thermal conductivity. When the ﬁller size is reduced to 5 µm, the
thermal conductivity reaches the highest value of 0.9 W·(mK)−1. In addition, this composite
material has good heat resistance performance and can maintain stability at the highest
temperature of 240 ◦C. (2) The composite material has signiﬁcant mechanical properties.
When the Al2O3 content is 10%, the tensile strength of the thermal conductive functional
material reaches its highest value. However, when the additive amount is increased to 14%,
the compressive strength of the composite material reaches the highest value of 55.1 MPa,
indicating that to a certain extent, increasing the Al2O3 content can improve the mechanical
properties of the composite material. In summary, this high thermal conductive functional
material prepared from PA6 and Al2O3 not only has excellent thermal conductivity and heat
resistance performance but also has good mechanical properties. This gives this composite
material a wide range of application potential in high-temperature application ﬁelds, such
as aerospace, automotive manufacturing, and electronic devices. This research provides
beneﬁcial practical experience for engineers and scientists in related ﬁelds, helping to
develop higher performance composite materials in actual applications.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.C. (Jibing Chen) and B.L.; methodology, J.C. (Jibing
Chen); software, J.C. (Jibing Chen) and B.L.; validation, J.C. (Junsheng Chen), B.L. and M.H.; formal
analysis, J.Y. and Y.W.; investigation, J.C. (Junsheng Chen) and B.L.; resources, J.C. (Junsheng Chen);
data curation, M.H. and Q.S.; writing—original draft preparation, B.L., J.C. (Junsheng Chen) and
M.H.; writing—review and editing, Q.S. and Y.W.; supervision, J.C. (Jibing Chen), Y.W. and J.Y.;
project administration, J.C. (Jibing Chen) and Y.W.; funding acquisition, J.C. (Jibing Chen) and J.Y. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research was supported by the Open Fund of Hubei Longzhong Laboratory (2022ZZ-17)
and the Science and Technology Project of Science and Technology Department of Hubei Province
(No. 2022EHB020).

Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.

Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.

Polymers 2023, 15, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 11   of the composite material reaches its highest value of 94 MPa. Compared with pure PA6, the compressive strength of this composite material has increased by 47.6%. Within a cer-tain range (alumina content ≤ 15%), the compressive strength of nylon composite materi-als increases with the increase in alumina content. This trend can be attributed to the dis-persion of alumina particles in the polymer matrix and the interaction between alumina particles and the polymer matrix [24]. However, when the alumina content exceeds this threshold, the excessive filler content leads to particle aggregation in the polymer matrix, which affects the overall performance of the composite material, resulting in a decreasing trend in compressive strength.  Figure 7. Compressive strength curve of Al2O3/nylon composites. ▲ denotes the compressive strength at various filler percentages. 4. Conclusions In this paper, researchers successfully prepared a composite material with high ther-mal conductivity using high thermal conductive functional materials, namely polyamide 6 (PA6) and alumina (Al2O3). Detailed experimental studies were conducted on the ther-mal conductivity, heat resistance, and performance at different filler ratios of this compo-site material. The experimental results show that: (1) using spherical fillers with a diame-ter of 20 μm can achieve a larger thermal conductivity. When the filler size is reduced to 5 μm, the thermal conductivity reaches the highest value of 0.9 W·(mK)−1. In addition, this composite material has good heat resistance performance and can maintain stability at the highest temperature of 240 °C. (2) The composite material has significant mechanical properties. When the Al2O3 content is 10%, the tensile strength of the thermal conductive functional material reaches its highest value. However, when the additive amount is in-creased to 14%, the compressive strength of the composite material reaches the highest value of 55.1 MPa, indicating that to a certain extent, increasing the Al2O3 content can improve the mechanical properties of the composite material. In summary, this high ther-mal conductive functional material prepared from PA6 and Al2O3 not only has excellent thermal conductivity and heat resistance performance but also has good mechanical prop-erties. This gives this composite material a wide range of application potential in high-temperature application fields, such as aerospace, automotive manufacturing, and elec-tronic devices. This research provides beneficial practical experience for engineers and scientists in related fields, helping to develop higher performance composite materials in actual applications. Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.C. (Jibing Chen) and B.L.; methodology, J.C. (Jibing Chen); software, J.C. (Jibing Chen) and B.L.; validation, J.C. (Junsheng Chen), B.L. and M.H.; formal Polymers 2023, 15, 2369

10 of 10

Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.

Acknowledgments: The authors acknowledge the technical support of Hubei Longzhong Laboratory,
and the Analytical and Testing Center of HUST for their analytical work.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.

Zhang, X.; Gai, P.; Zhang, B.; Tang, Y. Thermal conductivity of rubber composite materials with a hybrid AlN/carbon ﬁber ﬁller.
Chin. Sci. Bull. 2018, 63, 2403–2410. [CrossRef]

4.

3.

2. Houshyar, S.; Padhye, R.; Troynikov, O.; Nayak, R.; Ranjan, S. Evaluation and improvement of thermo-physiological comfort
properties of ﬁreﬁghters’ protective clothing containing super absorbent materials. J. Text. Inst. 2015, 106, 1394–1402. [CrossRef]
Abbasov, H. The effective thermal conductivity of polymer composites ﬁlled with high conductive particles and the shell structure.
Polym. Compos. 2022, 43, 2593–2601. [CrossRef]
Shao, Z.; He, X.; Niu, Z.; Huang, T.; Cheng, X.; Zhang, Y. Ambient pressure dried shape-controllable sodium silicate based
composite silica aerogel monoliths. Mater. Chem. Phys. 2015, 162, 346–353. [CrossRef]
Chen, H.; Sui, X.; Zhou, C.; Wang, C.H.; Yin, C.X.; Liu, F.T. Preparation and characterization of mullite ﬁber-reinforced Al2O3-SiO2
aerogel composites. Key Eng. Mater. 2016, 697, 360–363. [CrossRef]
Zhao, Y.; Zeng, X.; Ren, L.; Xia, X.; Zeng, X.; Zhou, J. Heat conduction of electrons and phonons in thermal interface materials.
Mater. Chem. Front. 2021, 5, 5617–5638. [CrossRef]

5.

6.

7. Mehra, N.; Mu, L.; Zhu, J. Developing heat conduction pathways through short polymer chains in a hydrogen bonded polymer

8.

system. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2017, 148, 97–105. [CrossRef]
Liu, C.; Rao, Z.; Zhao, J.; Huo, Y.; Li, Y. Review on nanoencapsulated phase change materials: Preparation, characterization and
heat transfer enhancement. Nano Energy 2015, 13, 814–826. [CrossRef]
Jasmee, S.; Omar, G.; Othaman, S.S.C.; Masripan, N.A.; Hamid, H.A. Interface thermal resistance and thermal conductivity of
polymer composites at different types, shapes, and sizes of ﬁllers: A review. Polym. Compos. 2021, 42, 2629–2652. [CrossRef]
10. Bose, P.; Amirtham, V.A. A review on thermal conductivity enhancement of parafﬁnwax as latent heat energy storage material.

9.

Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2016, 65, 81–100. [CrossRef]

11. Berenguer, J.P.; Berman, A.; Quill, T.; Zhou, T.; Kalaitzidou, K.; Cola, B.; Bougher, T. Incorporation of polyethylene ﬁllers in

all-polymer high-thermal-conductivity composites. Polym. Bull. 2021, 78, 3835–3850. [CrossRef]

12. Zhang, G.; Xue, S.; Chen, F.; Fu, Q. An efﬁcient thermal interface material with anisotropy orientation and high through-plane

thermal conductivity. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2022, 231, 109784. [CrossRef]

13. You, Y.-L.; Li, D.-X.; Deng, X.; Li, W.J.; Xie, Y. Effect of solid lubricants on tribological behavior of glass ﬁber reinforced polyamide

14.

15.

6. Polym. Compos. 2013, 34, 1783–1793. [CrossRef]
Samoilov, V.M.; Danilov, E.A.; Kaplan, I.M.; Lebedeva, M.V.; Yashtulov, N.A. Thermal Conductivity of Polymer Composite
Material Based on Phenol-Formaldehyde Resin and Boron Nitride. Russ. Phys. J. 2022, 65, 80–90. [CrossRef]
Sathees Kumar, S.; Kanagaraj, G. Investigation of Characterization and Mechanical Performances of Al2O3 and SiC Reinforced
PA6 Hybrid Composites. J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater. 2016, 26, 788–798. [CrossRef]

16. Zhang, J.; Jia, X.; He, Q. Mechanical, thermal, and friction properties of addition-type ﬂuororubber co-ﬁlled with Al2O3 particles

at high temperature. Polym. Test. 2021, 96, 107131. [CrossRef]

17. Mu, Q.H.; Peng, D.; Wang, F.; Li, J.H.; Zhang, S. Thermal Conductivity of Silicone Rubber Filled with Al2O3. Mater. Sci. Forum

2020, 987, 59–63. [CrossRef]

18. Tian, F.; Cao, J.; Ma, W. Enhanced thermal conductivity and rheological performance of epoxy and liquid crystal epoxy composites

with ﬁlled Al2O3 compound. Polym. Test. 2023, 120, 107940. [CrossRef]

19. Konopka, K.; Krasnowski, M.; Zygmuntowicz, J.; Cymerman, K.; Wachowski, M.; Piotrkiewicz, P. Characterization of Al2O3

20.

Samples and NiAl–Al2O3 Composite Consolidated by Pulse Plasma Sintering. Materials 2021, 14, 3398. [CrossRef]
Satheeskumar, S.; Kanagaraj, G. Experimental investigation on tribological behaviours of PA6, PA6-reinforced Al2O3 and
PA6-reinforced graphite polymer composites. Bull. Mater. Sci. 2016, 39, 1467–1481. [CrossRef]

21. Wieme, T.; Augustyns, B.; Duan, L.; Cardon, L. Increased through-plane thermal conductivity of injection moulded thermoplastic

composites by manipulation of ﬁller orientation. Plast. Rubber Compos. 2022, 51, 110–117. [CrossRef]

22. Abd-El-Galiel, D.; El-Matarawy, A.; El-Dien, E.M. Determination of Al2O3 Powder Thermal Conductivity Using DSC at NIS-Egypt.

J. Adv. Res. Fluid Mech. Therm. Sci. 2022, 97, 149–156. [CrossRef]

23. Li, H.; Zheng, W. Enhanced thermal conductivity of epoxy/alumina composite through multiscale-disperse packing. J. Compos.

24.

Mater. 2021, 55, 17–25. [CrossRef]
Shanmugan, S.; Nurjassriatul, J.A.; Mutharasu, D. Chemical Vapor Deposited Al2O3 Thin Film as Thermal Interface Material for
High Power LED Application. J. Optoelectron. Biomed. Mater. 2016, 8, 137–146.

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

