A P P L I E D   S C I E N C E S   A N D   E N G I N E E R I N G

Fluidic innervation sensorizes structures from a single 
build material
Ryan L. Truby1,2*†, Lillian Chin1†, Annan Zhang1, Daniela Rus1

Multifunctional materials with distributed sensing and programmed mechanical properties are required for myriad 
emerging technologies. However, current fabrication techniques constrain these materials’ design and sensing 
capabilities. We address these needs with a method for sensorizing architected materials through fluidic innervation, 
where distributed networks of empty, air-filled channels are directly embedded within an architected material’s 
sparse geometry. By measuring pressure changes within these channels, we receive feedback regarding material 
deformation. Thus, this technique allows for three-dimensional printing of sensorized structures from a single 
material. With this strategy, we fabricate sensorized soft robotic actuators on the basis of handed shearing auxetics 
and accurately predict their kinematics from the sensors’ proprioceptive feedback using supervised learning. Our 
strategy for facilitating structural, sensing, and actuation capabilities through control of form alone simplifies 
sensorized material design for applications spanning wearables, smart structures, and robotics.

Copyright © 2022 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
License 4.0 (CC BY).

INTRODUCTION
Multifunctionality is a defining feature in the composition and forms 
of biological systems (1, 2). For example, the xylem of vascular plants 
participates in water and nutrient transport while directly contributing 
to structural integrity and resiliency (3). Likewise, the hierarchical 
structure of skeletal muscles facilitates the innervation and vascular-
ization of densely packed muscle fibers, fulfilling the actuation, pro-
prioception, and metabolic needs of vertebrate locomotion (4, 5). These 
materials and structures have evolved to address multiple needs in a 
single composite, enabling living organisms to efficiently achieve the 
performance required for their continued survival and evolutionary 
fitness. Inspired by these lessons, engineers have increasingly explored 
multifunctionality in materials design as a strategy to improve the 
performance, range of capabilities, and efficiency of a broad range 
of new technologies (2, 6).

In particular, a large subset of emerging technologies require multi-
functional materials with programmable mechanical properties and 
distributed sensing (6–9). Recent works have demonstrated that bio-
inspired somatosensory materials can potentially address key per-
formance  challenges  in  next-generation  smart  structures  (10–14), 
wearable devices (15–18), and robots (19–24). However, the materials 
used in these applications typically have strict mechanical require-
ments, such as high strength-to-weight ratios, extreme stiffness or 
compliance, and stretchability. These constraints make it difficult to 
imbue existing optimized materials with sensing. Current approaches 
to creating sensorized materials—and multifunctional materials in 
general—involve the integration of multiple materials, either through 
manual  assembly  (10,  14,  16,  18,  19,  21–24),  microfabrication 
(15, 17, 20), or specialized three-dimensional (3D) printing methods 
(11–13). These fabrication techniques involve specialized, low- 
throughput, and/or complex methods or equipment that are often 
limited in the materials they can assemble. Their limitations prevent 

1Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. 2Departments of Materials Science and 
Engineering  and  Mechanical  Engineering,  Northwestern  University,  Evanston,  IL 
60208, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: rtruby@northwestern.edu
†These authors contributed equally to this work.

both  the  desired  mechanical  and  sensory  needs  from  being  met 
optimally.

Motivated by these challenges, we present a strategy for fabricating 
multifunctional materials with programmable mechanical behaviors 
and distributed sensing capabilities by controlling the form of a single 
build material. Our strategy involves the sensorization of architected 
materials with open fluidic networks, which we construct via 3D print-
ing (Fig. 1) (25). Architected materials are a class of materials that 
achieve tailorable mechanical properties entirely via geometry (26). 
While this makes them excellent for achieving optimally programmed 
mechanical performance, architected materials’ dependence on geo-
metry makes them difficult to sensorize. We surmount this problem 
by embedding empty, air-filled fluidic networks directly into an 
architected material’s internal structure. Once sealed, the networks’ 
internal pressures can be measured as voltage signals during deform-
ation and can be used as sensory feedback. Similar cavity-based fluidic 
sensors have been developed for tactile feedback in robotic grippers 
with compliant fingertips (27, 28) and soft robotic tactile skins (29). 
However,  all  of  these  methods  rely  on  molding-based  fabrication 
methods, yielding relatively large sensors that only provide tactile 
feedback. In contrast, our sensors are cocreated with the structure 
during 3D printing, enabling our sensors to be incorporated within more 
complex geometries and for more internal measurements. Likewise, 
the analog electronic feedback that we receive from our sensors is 
distinct from other types of soft fluidic sensors that provide solely 
binary mechanical feedback (30, 31). For example, fluidic bistable 
valves have enabled an electronics-free approach to reflexive tactile 
sensing in soft robotic grippers that autonomously grasp upon con-
tact with an object (30) and untethered soft robots that autonomously 
reverse gait upon activation of the fluidic sensor with an obstruc-
tion such as a wall (31). Sensing feedback from these fluidic sensors 
are only compatible with fluidic logic-based controllers (30, 31), while 
our sensors can interface with traditional electronic controllers through 
a pressure transducer.

Our methods present three key opportunities. First, fluidic inner-
vation provides a straightforward route for placing, distributing, and 
fabricating sensors within the sparse geometries of architected mate-
rials. Second, our fluidic sensing strategy avoids the time-varying ef-
fects common to current soft sensors. Soft sensors based on conductive 

1 of 10

Truby et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq4385 (2022)     10 August 2022SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLEA

E

F

B

C

Aspirate trapped resin

Tubing

Fluidic sensors

Adhesive

Left

Middle

Right

D

Top-left
sensor

Tubing

Btm-left
sensor

Center
sensor

At rest

Bend
down

Bend
up

Bend
left

Top

Middle

Bottom

Bend
right

Top-left
Top-mid
Top-right

Mid-left
Center
Mid-right

Btm-left
Btm-mid
Btm-right

Bend
down

Bend
left

Bend up and
down 3×

Bend left and
right 3×

Bend up

Bend right

G

At rest

Press left

Press middle

Press right

Press sides

Time (s)

H

Press left,
middle, and
right

Press left 3×,
middle 3×,
and right 3×

Press sides
3×

Fig. 1. Fluidically innervated architected materials. (A) A render (left) and photograph (right) of a sensorized cubic lattice. (B) Trapped resin (blue) is aspirated from the 
printed networks via vacuum (left), and tubing is inserted into the fluidic channels after the final resin curing step (right). (C) The photograph shows the sensorized lattice 
from behind with tubing running from each sensor. (D) The schematic shows a sensor map for the nine sensors in the lattice. (E) Photographs from movie S2 during 
manual bending with (F) the corresponding voltage change, V, over time from all sensors. (G) Photographs from movie S2 during tactile, pressing interactions with 
(H) the corresponding V over time for the same sensors. Scale bars, 1 cm. Mid, middle; Btm, bottom.

Time (s)

liquids,  piezoresistive  elastomers,  and  viscoelastic  waveguides  are 
susceptible to drift and hysteresis because of their underlying micro-
structures and/or physicochemical behaviors (32). Our fluidic sensing 
strategy sidesteps these issues by directly reading pressure changes 
of closed, deformable volumes patterned within the structure. Lastly, our 
methods enable the creation of soft robotic systems with true so-
matosensory capabilities by using machine learning to associate sensor 
feedback with deformation for proprioception. Building off our re-
cent efforts to develop compliant materials for motorized soft ro-
bots  (33–35),  we  use  our  methods  to  sensorize  a  range  of  structures, 
including  a  group  of  materials  called  handed  shearing  auxetics 
(HSAs) that our group has previously introduced (33). This combi-
nation  of  motors  and  fluidic  sensing  yields  a  soft  robotic  system 
with robust actuation and perception capabilities. Our system is not 

susceptible to failure by overpressurization or leakage as is common in 
fluidically actuated soft robots, allowing us to operate the device for 
extensive periods of time. We collect large sensorimotor datasets and 
develop a deep neural network to proprioceptively predict the multi–
degree-of-freedom (DOF) actuator’s kinematics. Fluidic innervation 
of the HSAs’ complex, sparse geometry represents an embodiment of 
a multifunctional construct that enables integrated structural, sens-
ing, and actuation capabilities achieved from a single build material.

RESULTS
3D printing sensorized architected materials
We  first  demonstrate our approach by 3D  printing sensorized 
versions of common lattice architectures (Fig. 1A). As outlined in 

2 of 10

Truby et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq4385 (2022)     10 August 2022SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLEFig. 1B, lattices with distributed fluidic networks are 3D printed from 
photopolymer resins using digital light processing (DLP). Non-
polymerized resin trapped within the fluidic networks during the 
printing process is aspirated by vacuum (movie S1), and channels 
are flushed with solvent and left empty. After parts are completely 
cured, fluidic sensor networks are connected to differential pressure 
transducers via elastomeric tubing (Fig. 1C) and sealed with adhe-
sives. The fluidic channels are therefore filled with air only, and we 
use the perceivable pressure changes of the closed volumes as the 
basis of our fluidic sensors. While DLP affords the patterning reso-
lution required to create our complex structures, the overall green 
body  strength  and  printing  resin’s  viscosity  and  pot  life  limit  the 
overall dimensions of fluidic features that we can pattern. We inves-
tigate the fabricable sensor geometries for multiple printing resins 
and find that the dimensions of successfully fabricated fluidic net-
works are resin dependent (fig. S1; see Materials and Methods).

According to Boyle’s law, deformation of the fluidically inner-
vated materials results in changes of the internal pressure of the net-
works, P, inversely proportional to volume changes (i.e., decreases 
via compression and increases via extension). P is measured using 
in-line differential pressure transducers, which report P-dependent 
voltages, V. We demonstrate these operating principles in Fig. 1 using 
the simple cubic lattice printed from an elastomeric resin (EPU 40, 
Carbon). The lattice has nine straight fluidic sensors running along 
its length (Fig. 1D). The “top” and “bottom” (Btm) sensors lie on 
the top and bottom row of struts in the beam, respectively. The 
“middle” (Mid) sensors lie in the center row of struts, at the approximate 
neutral plane of the beam during downward and upward bending. 
“Left,” “middle,” and “right” sensors fall in the leftmost, middle, 
and rightmost columns of struts. Thus, left and right sensors lie on 
opposite sides of the neutral plane when the beam undergoes left-
ward and rightward bends. As the cubic lattice undergoes manual 
bending (Fig. 1, E and F, and movie S2), we observe decreases in P 
for the sensors lying above the neutral plane (V < 0), while sensors 
below it report an increase in P (V > 0). Notably, middle sensors 
lying in the neutral plane only produce a small voltage increase, 
likely due to compression by the solid struts parallel to the direction 
of  bending.  In  Fig.  1  (G  and  H)  and  movie  S2,  we  explore  tactile 
sensor response by pressing on individual columns of sensors. In all 
instances, we observe increases in P during compression (V > 0), 
which  are  consistent  with  our  results  from  manual  bending.  We 
also observe a depth-dependent response, with sensors closer to the 
contact point providing greater V than those further from it. 
Importantly, in both sets of experiments, we observe clear, highly 
responsive feedback from all sensors during lattice deformation. Any 
instances  where  V  does  not  return  to  V  =  0  after  deformation 
result from either the lack of precise motion in manual deforma-
tions or the intrinsic creep and stress relaxation of the proprietary 
viscoelastic resins (35). Over a 12-hour thermal drift study, we ob-
served stable sensing (fig. S3 and Supplementary Text). Figures S4 
and S5 provide details of the data in Fig. 1 (E to H).

Mechanical characterization of sensorized lattices
We quantitatively study fluidic sensing with elastomeric, fluidically 
innervated body-centered cubic (BCC) and octahedral lattices under-
going compression (Fig. 2). Figure 2 (A and B) shows schematics of 
the BCC and octahedral lattices with five fluidic sensors of approxi-
mately equal volume (see table S1). We selected BCC (M = −13) and 
octahedral lattices (M = 0) for their similar architecture yet different 

bending- and stretching-dominated mechanical behaviors, respec-
tively, according to Maxwell’s stability criterion, M. Figure S6 and 
movie S3 demonstrate the individual sensitivity of the sensors, named 
S1 to S5, through a tactile demonstration, where sensor responses 
are recorded from the octahedral lattice as the lattice is manually 
pressed directly onto or nearby the sensors.

During compression testing (Fig. 2, C and D), we observe that 
the octahedral lattice is stiffer than the BCC lattice (Fig. 2, E and G). 
This stiffness is reflected in the higher V measured in the octahe-
dral lattice’s sensors (Fig. 2, F and H), corresponding to higher forces 
required for compression. In these experiments, we observe that the 
five sensors in each lattice behave similarly for compressive forces 
below approximately 100 N. Above 100 N, sensors in the octahedral 
lattice show greater variability with increased compression on account 
of the lattices’ extreme, heterogeneous deformation in this regime.

To understand the dynamic response of the fluidic sensors under 
step compressions, we recorded sensor responses for sensorized BCC 
and octahedral lattices compressed to fixed distances (Fig. 3 and fig. 
S7). Figure 3 provides the dynamic sensor responses of the BCC and 
octahedral  lattices  undergoing  60-s  step  compressions  of  20  mm 
(Fig. 3, Ai and Bi) and 1 mm (Fig. 3, Aiii and Biii). The correspond-
ing mechanical responses measured are provided in Fig. 3 (A, ii and 
iv, and B, ii and iv). The decrease in compressive force over the 60-s 
hold indicates stress relaxation in the lattices. For each lattice, we 
observe that the overall magnitude in sensor response V decreases 
with decreasing compression distance. This is in agreement with 
Fig. 2. Even the 1-mm compressions produce a measurable V, as 
shown in plots (iv) of Fig. 3. We also see that the magnitude in sensor 
response for each compression distance is greater for the stiffer octa-
hedral lattice than the BCC. Importantly, though, we observe a time- 
varying decay in V over the 60-s compression that corresponds to 
the stress relaxation response in Fig. 3 (A, ii and iv, and B, ii and iv). 
Movie  S4 shows an example compression  test  at  20 mm with the 
octahedral lattice. In this video, the octahedral lattice requires several 
seconds to return to its initial dimensions when the compressive force 
is removed, revealing the extent of stress relaxation in these visco-
elastic resins. Figure S7 shows additional sensor responses during 
step compressions at 5 and 10 mm.

Data from cyclic compression experiments in figs. S8 and S9 further 
reveal that the viscoelasticity of the cross-linked resins is responsible 
for any time-varying behavior in the sensors. Even after 10,000 cycles 
of compression (fig. S10), we observe largely nonhysteretic sensor 
responses given the fluidic sensing approach (Supplementary Text). 
Overall, the fluidic sensors’ performance during mechanical char-
acterization suggests that our sensorization technique is practical 
for architected structures and is a reliable alternative to soft matter–
based conductors.

Sensorized HSAs
We next turn to the sensorization of HSAs, a recently developed class 
of architected materials that our group has developed for the design 
of motorized soft robots (33–35). Through a repeated joint linkage 
design, the HSA form tightly couples twisting with linear extension, 
enabling a single motor to drive a pair of HSAs as a compliant, soft 
robotic actuator. As with other architected materials, HSAs are dif-
ficult to sensorize because of their complex forms, and sensors must 
accommodate  HSAs’  extreme  deformation  (36).  Sensorizing  via 
fluidic innervation bypasses this issue by allowing us to embed sensors 
within the HSA architecture. Using a flexible polyurethane resin 

3 of 10

Truby et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq4385 (2022)     10 August 2022SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLEA

S1 S2 S3 S4 S5

S5 S4 S3 S2 S1

B

S1 S2 S3 S4 S5

S5 S4 S3 S2 S1

C

E

BCC
lattice

D

Octahedral
lattice

0 mm

10 mm

20 mm

0 mm

10 mm
10 mm

20 mm

F

G

H

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5

Loading
Unloading

Loading
Unloading

Fig. 2. Sensory feedback in sensorized BCC and octahedral lattices. (A) BCC and (B) octahedral lattices sensorized with five fluidic sensors centered within the struc-
ture. (Left) Face-on, (right)  perspective views. (C, D) Photographs from compression tests of sensorized BCC and octahedral lattices, respectively. The force versus com-
pression data and voltage change, DV, versus compression response from all sensors are shown in (E, F) and (G, H) for the BCC and the octahedral lattices, respectively. In 
(E-H), data points and error bands represent mean and standard deviation (n = 3), and loading and unloading data are provided as filled and unfilled symbols, respective-
ly. (Scale bars represent 1 cm).

(FPU 50, Carbon) (35), we 3D-printed two different sensorized HSAs 
(sHSAs), each with three embedded fluidic sensors. The first sHSA 
is based on a straight, unconstrained variety (Fig. 4A). The straight 
sHSAs’  “full,”  “half,”  and  “quarter”  sensors  weave  through  the 
sHSA structure, terminating at 1×, 0.5×, and 0.25× the sHSA length, 
respectively. The second sHSA is based on a bending, constrained va-
riety (Fig. 4B). Adding constraint features in the HSA turns other-
wise linear extension into out-of-plane bending (34). The bending 
sHSAs’  sensors  are  called  “1/4,”  “3/4,”  and  “1/2.”  We  select  these 
asymmetric  sensor  designs  to  sense  different  areas  and  modes  of 
sHSA  deformation.  All  investigated  sHSA  design  parameters  are 
provided in table S2.

We characterized fluidic sensor responses embedded in straight 
sHSAs via cyclic tensile extension (Fig. 4C). sHSA extension yielded 
increasing V for the full and half sensors (with 1.5-mm diameters; 
Fig. 4D). As the sensors’ diameters were increased, we observed in-
creasing sensitivity from the full and half sensors (fig. S11). This is 
expected because larger sensor volumes provide larger pressure 
changes  during  identical  deformations  (Supplementary  Text  and 
table S2). Similarly, the quarter sensor’s small volume leads to neg-
ligible sensitivity during linear extension in all cases. Following an 

analogous investigation, we found that a sensor diameter of 1 mm is 
appropriate for bending sHSAs given the reduced width of their 
widest struts (Fig. 4B). We then used two oppositely handed bend-
ing sHSAs and constructed the soft robotic finger shown in Fig. 4E, 
fig. S12, and movie S5. While the sensors in this device have the 
smallest volume of all sensors presented in this work, we see agree-
ment  between  servo  input  and  V  for  the  3/4  and  1/2  sensors  in 
Fig. 4F. The small- volume 1/4 sensors report a noisy response be-
cause of their placement giving either a low sensitivity to bending or 
a minimal deformation with respect to the locations of the rigid 
constraint features.

Learning kinematics of sHSA-based soft robots
To  demonstrate  a  sensorized  version  of  an  electrically  driven, 
sHSA-based soft robot, we constructed the system shown in Fig. 5A 
and fig. S13. The design of this four-DOF soft robotic platform was 
originally introduced in (34) and is composed here of four straight 
sHSAs with 1.5-mm-diameter full, half, and quarter sensors. Each 
sHSA  is  actuated  by  a  different  servo  motor,  with  neighboring 
sHSAs having opposite handedness. Thus, the overall soft robot has 
12 fluidic sensors and four servos for actuation. Figure 5 (A and B) 

4 of 10

Truby et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq4385 (2022)     10 August 2022SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLEA

i

B

i

20-mm step compression

1-mm step compression

iii

iv

Time (s)

Time (s)

Time (s)

iii

iv

ii

ii

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5

S1
S2
S3
S4
S5

Time (s)

Time (s)

Time (s)

Time (s)

Time (s)

Fig. 3. Characterizing fluidic sensor responses during step compressions. Sensor and mechanical responses are provided for sensorized (A) BCC and (B) octahedral 
lattices undergoing step compressions. Plots (i) and (iii) provide sensor voltage change, ∆V, over time for the five fluidic sensors, S1 to S5, during 20- and 1-mm step 
compressions, respectively. Plots (ii) and (iv) provide the corresponding force and compression data over time, as measured via Instron during 60-s step compressions of 
20 and 1 mm, respectively. The insets in (A, iii) and (B, iii) are scaled to observe the small but measurable sensor changes in response to 1 mm of compression. ∆V = 0 is 
indicated in the insets by the dotted black line.

A

Mounting hole

Sensor inlets

B

Sensor end

Constraint features

Full
sensor

Half
sensor

Quarter
sensor

3/4
sensor

1/2
sensor

1/4
sensor

C

D

)

N

(
e
c
r
o
F

E

40

30

20

10

0

–10

0 10 20 30 40 50

At rest

Full
Half
Quarter

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

)

V

(

V
∆

0 mm

50 mm

0 10 20 30 40 50
Extension (mm)

Bent

F
t
u
p
n

i

o
v
r
e
S

1500

1000

500

0
0
0.60

0.45

0.30

0.15

0.00

)

V

(

V
Δ

20

40

L:
R:

3/4 1/2 1/4
3/4 1/2 1/4

–0.15

0 10 20 30 40 50
Time (s)

Fig. 4. Sensorizing electrically actuatable HSAs. (A and B) Schematics of (A) straight and (B) bending sHSAs show the overall sHSA shape (top) and internal placement 
of the fluidic sensors (bottom). (C) The photographs show a straight sHSA at 0- and 50-mm extension. (D) Plots of extension force (top) and voltage change, V, for the 
full, half, and quarter sensors (bottom) versus extension are provided for 1.5-mm sensor diameters. Error bands represent SD (n = 3). Triangles pointing upward and 
downward represent data points during extension from 0 to 50 mm and from 50 to 0 mm, respectively. (E) Photographs of a soft robotic actuator composed of two bend-
ing sHSAs of opposite handedness show at-rest and bent configurations. (F) Plots of servo input (top) and V for the 3/4, 1/2, and 1/4 sensors in the left (L)– and right 
(R)–handed sHSAs (1-mm sensor diameters) (bottom) versus time are provided as the actuator undergoes three actuation cycles. Scale bars, 1 cm.

5 of 10

Truby et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq4385 (2022)     10 August 2022SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLEand movie S6 show several of the maneuvers capable with the soft 
robot and the corresponding sensor responses, while fig. S14 pro-
vides the corresponding servo inputs.

Despite an increasing focus on data-driven approaches for solv-
ing longstanding challenges in soft robot control (21, 23, 24, 37, 38), 
the robustness and reliability of current soft robotic actuation and 
sensing strategies limit the size of datasets that can be acquired for 
proprioceptively determining shape or kinematics in soft sensorized 
robots. For example, popular pneumatically actuated soft robots are 

notoriously susceptible to premature failure from overpressurization 
with repeated actuation, making it challenging to build sufficiently 
large datasets. To evaluate the robustness of our system in alleviat-
ing performance challenges in data-driven approaches to soft robotic 
perception, we drove our soft robot through varying extents of its 
four DOFs for over 18 hours of sensorimotor experimentation, mea-
suring sensor responses against a motion capture ground truth. This 
long data collection period is notably large for a soft robotic system. 
As described in the Materials and Methods, we then used this large, 

At rest

Elongate

Contract

S. bend

N. bend

E. bend W. bend CW twist CCW twist

5 s

50 s

105 s

114 s

Time (s)

Prediction

Ground truth

)

m
m

(
Z

160
120
80
40
0
–50
0
Y (mm)

50

160
120
80
40
0
–50

–50

0
50
X (mm)

160
120
80
40
0
–50

–50

0

50

0

50

160
120
80
40
0
–50

–50

0 50

0

50

–50
0

50

0

50

A

B

C

D

Fig. 5. Proprioception in an sHSA robotic platform. (A) Photographs of an sHSA platform in motion and (B) corresponding changes in the voltage changes, V, over 
time from the full (top), half (middle), and quarter sensors (bottom). (C) Snapshots from animations in movie S7 of the predicted and ground truth postures of the sHSA 
platform are provided for an actuation sequence from our test set with (D) a corresponding plot of the position (Position) and orientation (Angle) error over time. The 
animation snapshots aid in visualizing the predicted and ground truth platform predictions at 5, 50, 105, and 114 s. Scale bars, 25 mm. S, south; N, north; E, east; W, west; 
CW, clockwise; CCW, counterclockwise.

Time (s)

6 of 10

Truby et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq4385 (2022)     10 August 2022SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLErich dataset to train a long short-term memory (LSTM)–based deep 
neural network capable of proprioceptively predicting the soft ro-
bot’s kinematics solely based on the data from 12 fluidic sensors as 
model inputs (fig. S16). Other data-driven sensing pipelines based 
on soft sensors with time-varying, hysteretic behaviors require neu-
ral  networks  with  large  numbers  of  hidden  layers  (21,  23).  We 
achieve accurate pose predictions of our sHSA platform with a sim-
ple network architecture. Figure 5 (C and D) and movie S7 show 
animated representations of our ground truth and model-predicted 
rigid body pose of the platform with corresponding Euclidean dis-
tance (i.e., position) error and rotational angle error over the course 
of  representative  time  series  (see  fig.  S18  for  error  explanation). 
While we certainly observe outlying instances, we generally observe 
that kinematic predictions align well with ground truth when soft 
robot  motion  is  more  continuous  and  holding  of  a  pose  is  mini-
mized. We suspect that this is due to the use of voltage changes as 
model inputs, as opposed to absolute voltage values. For interpret-
ing the prediction data shown in Fig. 5 (C and D) and movie S7, we 
note that the rest length of the sHSA platform is 120 mm, and the 
maximum vertical extension is approximately 40 mm. The overall 
position error in Fig. 5D is small compared to these lengths. Thus, 
our  motorized  sHSAs  and  fluidic  sensing  strategies  allow  us  to 
bring robust actuation and perception capabilities to soft robotics, 
bypassing both of these problematic issues for the field.

DISCUSSION
We  have  demonstrated  the  versatility  and  integrity  of  our  fluidic 
sensing strategy across a wide range of passive and active architected 
materials. Using a DLP-based printing method, we simultaneously 
create sensorized, architected materials and innervating vascular networks 
for fluidic sensing, bypassing the need for copatterning structural 
materials with conductive materials that have extreme time- varying 
behaviors. Importantly, following a bioinspired approach to multi-
functional material design, our strategy of sensorizing structures through 
fluidic innervation greatly simplifies how materials with self-sensing 
and programmed mechanical behaviors can be fabricated. Through 
the sensorization of HSAs, we also introduce a soft robotic system 
representing the first demonstration of how a single build material 
can be architected to simultaneously achieve tailored structural 
properties, distributed sensing, and actuation capabilities. While many 
future sensorized materials and structures may require multiple 
materials for their design specifications, our method showcases a 
single-material approach to sensorizing architected materials, an im-
portant class of materials whose sparse, complex geometries complicate 
conventional approaches for fabricating sensing networks through-
out. Moreover, many of these materials are already predominantly 
fabricated with DLP and other light-based printing methods, making 
our approach a strong fit for empowering future material research. 
Coupling the simplicity of our sensorization approach with other digitally 
fabricated materials could herald fundamentally new opportunities for 
the design and manufacturing of sensorized materials for wearable 
devices, smart structures, autonomous bioinspired robots, and beyond.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
3D printing fluidically innervated architected materials
Fluidically innervated architected materials are parametrically de-
signed in Rhino 6 and Grasshopper (Robert McNeel & Associates) 

with the Shortest Walk and Crystallon Grasshopper plugins. All parts 
are 3D-printed via DLP (Carbon M1 printer, Carbon Inc.) from 
commercially available elastomeric polyurethane (EPU 40), FPU 50, 
and transparent resin Loctite 3D IND405 (LOCTITE) photopolymer 
resins (all from Carbon Inc.). The sensorized lattices and sHSAs are 
printed from EPU and FPU, respectively. All transparent models are 
printed from Loctite 3D IND405. The resins and printed structures 
are used and postprocessed, respectively, according to the manu-
facturer’s protocols. Supports are printed for sHSAs only. Tables S1 
and S2 provide design parameters for all sensorized lattices and 
sHSAs, respectively.

The fluidic networks must be emptied and cleared of residual resin 
to prevent occlusion of the sensors before any ultraviolet or thermal 
curing steps are taken in the postprocessing procedures. Upon re-
moval of the part from the build platform, fluidic sensor networks 
are aspirated by vacuum. We use a vacuum to aspirate any remain-
ing  resin  from  printed  fluidic  networks  because  positive  pressure 
can rupture the fluidic channels in the green body state. The chan-
nels are flushed with pressurized air, and isopropanol (IPA) is flushed 
into the inlet of each sensor for 5 to 15 s to verify that the channel is 
open. Channels are flushed a second time with pressurized air and 
IPA. Parts are dried with pressurized air and postprocessed accord-
ing to the manufacturer’s specifications.

Sensorization and readout electronics
Sensor networks are designed with an inlet and an outlet, where inlets 
are locations for sensor tubing and outlets are included to facilitate 
removal of residual resin. After postprocessing, the silicone tubing 
(outer diameter of 0.94 mm and inside diameter of 0.51 mm; 
McMaster Carr) is glued into each sensor inlet using Sil-Poxy (Smooth-
On). Pressurized air is used to verify successful leak-proof adhesion 
of the tubing to the sHSA, and sensor outlets are closed by filling 
with a small amount of Sil-Poxy, creating a closed volume. Sensor 
tubing is then joined to differential pressure sensors by threading the 
sensor tubing into larger diameter tubing placed over the sensors’ 
ports. Three differential pressure sensors (Amphenol, All Sensors) 
are used to measure pressure changes in the ranges of 0 to 0.5 in 
H2O (0.5 INCH-D1-4V-MINI), 0 to 1 in H2O (1 INCH-D1-P4V-
MINI), and 0 to 5 in H2O (5 INCH-D1-P4V-MINI). Range 0 to 5 in 
H2O differential pressure sensors is used for the fluidically innervated 
cubic, BCC, and octahedral lattices. Range 0 to 1 in H2O pressure 
sensors is used for the full and half sensors of straight sHSAs, as well 
as the 3/4 and 1/2 sensors of the bending sHSAs. Range 0 to 0.5 in 
H2O pressure sensors is used for the quarter and 1/4 sensors of the 
straight and bending sHSAs, respectively. All output voltage signals 
from differential pressure sensors are filtered by a low-pass filter 
(cutoff frequency of ≈30 Hz) and read by a digital acquisition unit 
(NI USB-6212 DAQ, National Instruments). All reported sensor 
outputs are unfiltered.

The differential pressure sensors have two ports. The nominal 
voltage at a zero differential pressure (i.e., when both ports are at 
atmospheric pressure) is 2.25 V (specification sheet, Miniature 
Amplified Low-Pressure Sensors, All Sensors). Therefore, one can 
select  which  port  is  connected  to  the  fluidic  sensor  to  achieve  an 
increasing/decreasing voltage change with respect to 2.25 V for an 
increasing pressure in the fluidic sensor. As discussed in greater de-
tail in Supplementary Text, we mitigate effects due to thermal drift 
by connecting the second port of the differential pressure sensor to 
a dummy line, which comprises identical silicone tubing that wraps 

7 of 10

Truby et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq4385 (2022)     10 August 2022SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLEaround the tubing to the functional fluidic sensor. After all tubing 
are sealed and connected to the differential pressure sensor, we allow 
the sensors to reach equilibrium internal pressures for 48 hours, which 
is the time point on which a differential pressure sensor connected 
to a fluidic network reports a nominal voltage of approximately 2.25 V.

Print parameter characterization
The pressure drop, P, required to remove all remaining resin via 
vacuum is dependent on the length, L, and radius, R, of the network, 
per the Hagen-Poiseuille equation

 P  =    

8L
 ─ 
  R   4 

   Q  

where  is the resin viscosity and Q is the flow rate initiated by the 
vacuum. To evaluate the fabricability of fluidic networks in archi-
tected materials, cubic lattices innervated with straight fluidic chan-
nels  are  printed  as  model  structures  with  which  print  parameters 
can be screened. The lattices have a unit cell size of 5 mm, width of 
five cells, length of five cells, and a strut diameter of 2 mm. Within 
each lattice, there are 21 straight fluidic channels that span the height 
of the lattice, corresponding to three replicates of seven different 
channel diameters (i.e., 2R) 0.5, 0.75, 1.0, 1.25, 1.5, 1.75, and 2.0 mm. 
Six different heights (i.e., L) are evaluated: 5, 10, 25, 50, 75, and 
100 mm. Pressurized air is flushed through each channel, which are 
noted as successful if air flows through freely and failed if air flow is 
blocked by incomplete removal of resin.

Characterization of sensorized lattices
Nine sensor responses in the cubic lattices are characterized by manual 
deformation in directional bending and pressing motifs. Five sensor 
responses from BCC and octahedral lattices are characterized using 
an Instron during cyclic, uniaxial compression. The BCC and octa-
hedral lattices’ fluidic sensors have approximately equal volume and 
are positioned vertically within one central row of unit cells. Sensors 
from all sensorized lattices are measured at a sampling frequency of 
50 Hz in all characterization experiments.

BCC  and  octahedral  lattices  undergo  two  rounds  of  break-in 
compression cycles before further characterization: 100 cycles of 
compression to 10 mm at 1 mm/s and 100 cycles of compression to 
20 mm at 5 mm/s. The lattices are then compressed at 2.5-mm in-
crements from 0 to 20 mm and then decompressed from 20 to 
0 mm. At each (de)compression interval, a force measurement is 
recorded from the Instron, and the sensor readings are recorded for 
10 s, over which a mean and SD output voltage is determined for 
each sensor. This process is repeated three times.

Step compressions on BCC and octahedral lattices are conducted 
on an Instron. The lattices are compressed at 20 mm/s by 20, 10, 5, 
and 1 mm for 60 s. These compression distances correspond to com-
pressive strains of 0.4, 0.2, 0.1, and 0.02, respectively, as the lattice 
structures are approximately 50 mm in height. Compressive load is 
removed at 20 mm/s. Sensor readings are taken before, during, and 
after the step compression.

Lastly, the BCC lattice was cyclically compressed 10,000 cycles to 
10 mm at 1 mm/s. For this study, sensor readings were recorded at 5 Hz.

Characterization of sHSAs
Sensor responses from straight sHSAs are characterized using an 
Instron during cyclic, uniaxial extension. Straight sHSAs with fluidic 

sensor  diameters  of  0.75,  1,  1.25,  1.5,  and  1.75  mm  were  studied. 
Custom adapters are used to mount the straight sHSAs to the In-
stron to allow for free rotation of one end of the sHSA while fixing 
the other. Straight sHSAs are stretched in 5-mm increments from 
0 to 50 mm and then back to 0 mm, with sensor readings recorded 
from each sensor by measuring the mean and SD of the reading 
over 10 s of sampling at 50 Hz. Experiments are repeated three times. 
Before all experiments, straight sHSAs are cyclically extended 50 mm 
at 10 mm/s for 100 cycles as break-in to remove any strain-softening 
behaviors due to the Mullins effect. sHSAs are then cycled at 1 mm/s 
for 10 cycles to validate that no leaks are present.

Bending sHSA assemblies are actuated using Dynamixel MX-28 
servos (ROBOTIS) and are controlled via MATLAB (MathWorks). 
Two sHSAs, each of opposite handedness, are counterrotated against 
each other in a geared setup with a single servo. Sensor readings are 
collected at ≈15 Hz.

sHSA soft robotic platform
Soft robotic fingers and multi-DOF platforms are constructed [as 
previously described in (35)] from sHSAs. Briefly, sHSA fingers and 
platforms are based on 2 × 1 and 2 × 2 assemblies of sHSAs with 
opposite handedness, respectively. Fingers are driven by one ser-
vo motor, while platforms are driven by four servo motors (i.e., one 
servo  per sHSA). All soft robotic systems are actuated using 
Dynamixel MX-28 servos (ROBOTIS) and are controlled via MATLAB 
(MathWorks).

Data collection with sHSA platform
Data for neural network prediction of the sHSA platform’s pose 
were taken by driving the platform through a series of motions 
while simultaneously recording sensor values against a motion cap-
ture ground truth. For all experiments, the sHSA platform is actuated 
through a sequence of motions, returning to its neutral position after 
each one. The motions are elongation, contraction, bend forward 
(or north bend), bend backward (or south bend), bend left (or 
west bend), bend right (or east bend), clockwise twist, and counter- 
clockwise twist. For each trial, all of the motions are performed, 
but the order in which they are performed is randomized.

During these experiments, output voltage signals from differ-
ential pressure sensors are recorded by a digital acquisition unit 
(NI USB-6212 DAQ, National Instruments) through MATLAB 
(MathWorks). MATLAB also directly records servo position feed-
back from Dynamixel MX-28 servos (ROBOTIS). Ground truth 
readings are recorded through rigid body motion tracking via Motive 
(OptiTrack). Data across software are synchronized via the inter-
polation of UNIX time stamps associated with each measurement, 
resulting in a final sampling frequency of 15 Hz. To normalize across 
trials, the initial sensor measurement for each trial is recorded as 
0 V, so further sensor readings are reported as the pressure differ-
ence in the fluidic sensors.

To add variance across trials, a specific servo velocity, extent of 
motion range, and end-of-movement hold time are chosen from a 
preselected list of options. This causes each trial to be of different 
lengths, making it harder for the neural network to track spurious 
patterns. For example, a faster servo velocity will result in the se-
quence being completed in less time. The servo speeds studied were 5, 
10, 20, and 40 rpm. The hold times studied were 0, 5, and 10 s. The 
range fractions studied were 25, 50, 75, and 100% of full DOF range. For 
each given velocity, range, and hold time, five trials were conducted.

8 of 10

Truby et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq4385 (2022)     10 August 2022SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE 
In summary, 240 trials were autonomously recorded over a single 
7-hour period. Nineteen of these trials did not have accurate syn-
chronization between the motion capture and MATLAB recordings 
and were omitted. Nine more of these trials were found to have 
errors in the data concatenation process and were omitted as well. 
These experiments formed the dataset used for the neural network 
training, testing, and validation. A total of 11 hours of additional 
experiments was conducted to debug the data collection script, to 
break in and calibrate the sHSAs, and to take videos and photographs.

Neural network design, training, and testing
Learning problem
To estimate the forward kinematics of the four-DOF sHSA platform, 
a neural network that predicts its pose (i.e., position and orienta-
tion) solely using analog voltage readings from the fluidic sensors as 
input  is  developed.  Because  time-dependent  effects  such  as  stress 
relaxation and creep are inherent to viscoelastic materials used for 
HSAs, the input-output relation is modeled with LSTM networks, a 
class of neural networks commonly used for learning-based proprio-
ception in soft robotics because of their ability to capture temporal 
relations (21, 23, 24, 37).
Data preprocessing
Of the 212 remaining time sequences, the last 32 are set aside as the 
test set. Because these test data are neither used for model training 
nor for model selection, evaluating the final LSTM on it provides an 
unbiased estimate of the system performance in deployment. The 
data from the remaining 180 experiments account for ≈85% of the 
total  data  and  form  the  basis  for  the  training  and  validation  sets. 
Because the longest of these recordings consists of 3688 time steps, 
which is difficult to learn even for LSTMs, sequences of a more 
manageable length are extracted by sliding a window of length 64 
over each recording (fig. S15). To simultaneously augment the data-
set, the window is slid with a stride of 20. The first data point in each 
recording (zero voltage difference for input data; initial pose for out-
put data) is duplicated until the length of the recording equals 64 plus 
a multiple of 20. In this way, a total of 14,528 sequences with length 
64 are generated. A total of 1453 (≈10%) are split off randomly as a 
validation set to evaluate a particular choice of hyperparameters during 
the model selection process. Lastly, training and validation sets are 
shuffled, inputs are normalized to zero mean and unit variance, and 
outputs are normalized to zero mean.
Neural network architecture
The neural network reads in a time sequence of 12D vectors (sensor 
voltages) and outputs a time sequence of 7D vectors (platform pose) 
with equal length (fig. S16). The inputs are first passed through stacked 
LSTM layers, where the number of layers and the number of hidden 
and cell states are tunable hyperparameters. The output of the LSTM 
layers  are  then  passed  through  a  fully  connected  layer  with  equal 
input and output dimensions, followed by ReLU (rectified linear unit) 
activation. The data are passed through another fully connected layer 
that outputs a 7D vector. Lastly, a normalization layer is applied to 
the four values corresponding to the orientation prediction be-
cause an orientation is given by a 4D vector that represents the co-
efficients of a unit quaternion. To mitigate overfitting, the first fully 
connected layer and all LSTM layers are equipped with a dropout 
probability of 0.2.

Because the coefficients of unit quaternions can be interpreted as 
points on a 4D hypersphere, the distance between two quaternions are 
described by the geodesic distance on the hypersphere. Furthermore, 

by definition of quaternions, antipodal points on the hypersphere 
describe the same orientation in 3D Euclidean space. However, the 
simple mean squared error (MSE) is found to be sufficient in prac-
tice, although it neglects both the curvature of the hypersphere and 
the symmetry of quaternions. This choice is reasonable as long as 
training converges, because the Euclidean distance approximates the 
geodesic distance for quaternions close to each other. The loss be-
tween predicted and ground truth pose is therefore computed as the 
sum of the position MSE and the quaternion MSE, although addition-
ally weighted by a hyperparameter that balances the relative impor-
tance of minimizing these errors.
Model selection
Starting around an initial configuration found by following the best 
practice guidelines for training LSTMs (39), a grid search over the 
following hyperparameters is performed: quaternion weight (10, 100, 
and 1000), initial learning rate (0.001, 0.005, and 0.01), number of 
LSTM layers (1, 2, and 3), and number of hidden and cell states (50, 
100, 150, and 200). Implemented in PyTorch, all models are trained 
with the Adam optimizer and a batch size of 32 for 100 epochs. The 
learning rate scheduler halves the learning rate when the validation 
error does not improve for 20 epochs. To avoid overfitting, an early 
stopping rule observing the loss on the validation set is used. In other 
words, while training with a particular choice of hyperparameters, 
only the model that shows the lowest validation error across all 100 
epochs is retained. To account for randomness during neural net-
work training, the validation loss for a particular choice of hyper-
parameters is averaged over a total of three runs. Lastly, the model 
with the lowest validation error across all possible choices of 
hyperparameters is retrained for 1000 epochs. Out of three runs, 
the run with the lowest validation loss is kept as the best model for 
evaluation on the test set. The summary statistics of this hyperpa-
rameter search can be found in table S1 and fig. S17.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at https://science.org/doi/10.1126/
sciadv.abq4385

REFERENCES AND NOTES
  1.  U. G. K. Wegst, H. Bai, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia, R. O. Ritchie, Bioinspired structural materials. 

Nat. Mater. 14, 23–36 (2015).

  2.  M. Eder, S. Amini, P. Fratzl, Biological composites–complex structures for functional diversity. 

Science 362, 543–547 (2018).

  3.  L. J. Gibson, The hierarchical structure and mechanics of plant materials. J. R. Soc. Interface 

9, 2749–2766 (2012).

  4.  W. R. Frontera, J. Ochala, Skeletal muscle: A brief review of structure and function. Calcif. 

Tissue Int. 96, 183–195 (2015).

  5.  J. C. Tuthill, E. Azim, Proprioception. Curr. Biol. 28, R194–R203 (2018).
  6.  M. A. McEvoy, N. Correll, Materials that couple sensing, actuation, computation, and 

communication. Science 347, 1261689 (2015).

  7.  G.-Z. Yang, J. Bellingham, P. E. Dupont, P. Fischer, L. Floridi, R. Full, N. Jacobstein, V. Kumar, 
M. McNutt, R. Merrifield, B. J. Nelson, B. Scassellati, M. Taddeo, R. Taylor, M. Veloso, Z. L. Wang, 
Robert Wood, the grand challenges of Science Robotics. Sci. Robot. 3, eaar7650 (2018).
  8.  C. Kaspar, B. J. Ravoo, W. G. van der Wiel, S. V. Wegner, W. H. P. Pernice, The rise of intelligent 

matter. Nature 594, 345–355 (2021).

  9.  M. Kaur, T.-H. Kim, W. S. Kim, New frontiers in 3D structural sensing robots. Adv. Mater. 33, 

2002534 (2021).

  10.  N. C. Sears, J. D. Berrigan, P. R. Buskohl, R. L. Harne, Flexible hybrid electronic material 

systems with programmable strain sensing architectures. Adv. Eng. Mater. 20, 1800499 
(2018).

  11.  Y. Yang, X. Li, M. Chu, H. Sun, J. Jin, K. Yu, Q. Wang, Q. Zhou, Y. Chen, Electrically assisted 

3D printing of nacre-inspired structures with self-sensing capability. Sci. Adv. 5, eaau9490 
(2019).

9 of 10

Truby et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq4385 (2022)     10 August 2022SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE  12.  R. Hensleigh, H. Cui, Z. Xu, J. Massman, D. Yao, J. Berrigan, X. Zheng, Charge-programmed 
three-dimensional printing for multi-material electronic devices. Nat. Electron. 3, 216–224 
(2020).

  13.  J. Gong, O. Seow, C. Honnet, J. Forman, S. Mueller, MetaSense: Integrating sensing 
capabilities into mechanical metamaterial, in Proceedings of the 34th Annual ACM 
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Association for Computing 
Machinery, 2021), pp. 1063–1073.

  14.  C. El Helou, P. R. Buskohl, C. E. Tabor, R. L. Harne, Digital logic gates in soft, conductive 

mechanical metamaterials. Nat. Commun. 12, 1633 (2021).

  15.  D. Son, J. Lee, S. Qiao, R. Ghaffari, J. Kim, J. E. Lee, C. Song, S. J. Kim, D. J. Lee, S. W. Jun, 

S. Yang, M. Park, J. Shin, K. Do, M. Lee, K. Kang, C. S. Hwang, N. Lu, T. Hyeon, D.-H. Kim, 
Multifunctional wearable devices for diagnosis and therapy of movement disorders. 
Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 397–404 (2014).

  16.  H. Zhao, K. O’Brien, S. Li, R. F. Shepherd, Optoelectronically innervated soft prosthetic 

hand via stretchable optical waveguides. Sci. Robot. 1, eaai7529 (2016).

  17.  M. Rein, V. D. Favrod, C. Hou, T. Khudiyev, A. Stolyarov, J. Cox, C.-C. Chung, C. Chhav, 

M. Ellis, J. Joannopoulos, Y. Fink, Diode fibres for fabric-based optical communications. 
Nature 560, 214–218 (2018).

  18.  H. Bai, S. Li, J. Barreiros, Y. Tu, C. R. Pollock, R. F. Shepherd, Stretchable distributed 

fiber-optic sensors. Science 370, 848–852 (2020).

  19.  C. Larson, B. Peele, S. Li, S. Robinson, M. Totaro, L. Beccai, B. Mazzolai, R. Shepherd, Highly 
stretchable electroluminescent skin for optical signaling and tactile sensing. Science 351, 
1071–1074 (2016).

  20.  R. L. Truby, M. Wehner, A. K. Grosskopf, D. M. Vogt, S. G. M. Uzel, R. J. Wood, J. A. Lewis, 
Soft somatosensitive actuators via embedded 3D printing. Adv. Mater. 30, 1706383 
(2018).

  21.  T. G. Thuruthel, B. Shih, C. Laschi, M. T. Tolley, Soft robot perception using embedded soft 

sensors and recurrent neural networks. Sci. Robot. 4, eaav1488 (2019).

  22.  P. A. Xu, A. K. Mishra, H. Bai, C. A. Aubin, L. Zullo, R. F. Shepherd, Optical lace for synthetic 

afferent neural networks. Sci. Robot. 4, eaaw6304 (2019).

  23.  R. L. Truby, C. D. Santina, D. Rus, Distributed proprioception of 3D configuration in soft, 
sensorized robots via deep learning. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 5, 3299–3306 (2020).

  24.  S. A. Manzano, P. Xu, K. Ly, R. Shepherd, N. Correll, High-bandwidth nonlinear control for 
soft actuators with recursive network models. arXiv:2101.01139 [cs.RO] (4 January 
2021).

  25.  J. R. Tumbleston, D. Shirvanyants, N. Ermoshkin, R. Janusziewicz, A. R. Johnson, D. Kelly, 
K. Chen, R. Pinschmidt, J. P. Rolland, A. Ermoshkin, E. T. Samulski, J. M. DeSimone, 
Continuous liquid interface production of 3D objects. Science 347, 1349–1352 (2015).
  26.  K. Bertoldi, V. Vitelli, J. Christensen, M. van Hecke, Flexible mechanical metamaterials. 

Nat. Rev. Mater. 2, 17066 (2017).

  27.  J. Kim, A. Alspach, K. Yamane, 3D printed soft skin for safe human-robot interaction, in 
2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) (IEEE, 
2015), pp. 2419–2425.

  28.  L. He, Q. Lu, S.-A. Abad, N. Rojas, T. Nanayakkara, Soft fingertips with tactile sensing 

and active deformation for robust grasping of delicate objects. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 5, 
2714–2721 (2020).

  29.  A. M. Gruebele, M. A. Lin, D. Brouwer, S. Yuan, A. C. Zerbe, M. R. Cutkosky, A stretchable 

tactile sleeve for reaching into cluttered spaces. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 6, 5308–5315 (2021).
  30.  P. Rothemund, A. Ainla, L. Belding, D. J. Preston, S. Kurihara, Z. Suo, G. M. Whitesides, A soft, 
bistable valve for autonomous control of soft actuators. Sci. Robot. 3, eaar7986 (2018).
  31.  D. Drotman, S. Jadhav, D. Sharp, C. Chan, M. T. Tolley, Electronics-free pneumatic circuits 

for controlling soft-legged robots. Sci. Robot. 6, eaay2627 (2021).

  32.  S. Li, H. Bai, R. F. Shepherd, H. Zhao, Bio-inspired design and additive manufacturing 

of soft materials, machines, robots, and haptic interfaces. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 58, 
11182–11204 (2019).

  33.  J. I. Lipton, R. MacCurdy, Z. Manchester, L. Chin, D. Cellucci, D. Rus, Handedness in 

shearing auxetics creates rigid and compliant structures. Science 360, 632–635 (2018).

  34.  L. Chin, J. Lipton, R. MacCurdy, J. Romanishin, C. Sharma, D. Rus, Compliant electric 

actuators based on handed shearing auxetics, in Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE-RAS 
International Conference on Soft Robotics (RoboSoft) (IEEE, 2018), pp. 100–107.
  35.  R. L. Truby, L. Chin, D. Rus, A recipe for electrically-driven soft robots via 3D printed 

handed shearing auxetics. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 6, 795–802 (2021).

  36.  L. Chin, M. C. Yuen, J. Lipton, L. H. Trueba, R. Kramer-Bottiglio, D. Rus, A simple electric soft 
robotic gripper with high-deformation haptic feedback, in Proceedings of the 2019 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (IEEE, 2019), pp. 2765–2771.

  37.  R. K. Mehta, A. P. Sabelhaus, A. T. Wertz, C. Majidi, In-situ sensing and dynamics predictions 

for electrothermally-actuated soft robot limbs. arXiv:2111.04851 [cs.RO] (7 March 2022).

  38.  K. Chin, T. Hellebrekers, C. Majidi, Machine learning for soft robotic sensing and control. 

Adv. Intell. Syst. Comput. 2, 1900171 (2020).

  39.  A. Géron, Hands-On Machine Learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow: Concepts, 

Tools, and Techniques to Build Intelligent Systems (O’Reilly Media, 2019).

Acknowledgments: We would like to thank R. Hasani (MIT) for valuable discussions around 
data augmentation techniques for LSTM training. Funding: This work was supported by 
National Science Foundation EFRI grant 1830901; the Schmidt Science Fellows Program, in 
partnership with the Rhodes Trust (to R.L.T.); National Science Foundation Graduate Research 
Fellowship 1122374 (to L.C.); and the Fannie and John Hertz Foundation (to L.C.) Author 
Contributions: R.L.T. and L.C. conceived the study. R.L.T. and D.R. supervised the project. R.L.T. 
and L.C. planned and performed the experiments, and R.L.T., L.C., and A.Z. collected and 
analyzed the data. All authors discussed the results and wrote the manuscript. Competing 
interests: The authors have filed a provisional patent application related to this work: U.S. 
application no.: 63/283,655, “Distributed proprioception in soft, architected materials via 
fluidic innervation,” filed 29 November 2021. The authors declare that they have no other 
competing interests. Data and materials availability: http://people.csail.mit.edu/ltchin/
sHSA_data/ contains the data and code used to train and evaluate the neural network that 
predicts the pose of the sHSA platform from its proprioceptive sensors, as well as the code 
used to generate renders of the sHSA platform. All other data needed to evaluate the 
conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.

Submitted 8 April 2022
Accepted 27 June 2022
Published 10 August 2022
10.1126/sciadv.abq4385

10 of 10

Truby et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabq4385 (2022)     10 August 2022SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE