Surface topography as a material 
parameter

Tevis D.B. Jacobs* 

 and Lars Pastewka,* 

 Guest Editors

Materials science is about understanding the relationship between a material’s structure and its 
properties—in the sphere of mechanical behavior, this includes elastic modulus, yield strength, 
and other bulk properties. We show in this issue that, analogously, a material’s surface 
structure governs its surface properties—such as adhesion, friction, and surface stiffness. 
For bulk materials, microstructure is a critical component of structure; for surfaces, the 
structure is governed largely by surface topography. The articles in this issue cover the latest 
understanding of these structure–property connections for surfaces. This includes both the 
theoretical basis for how properties depend on topography, as well as the latest understanding 
of how surface topography emerges, how to measure and understand topography-dependent 
properties, and how to engineer surfaces to improve performance. The present article frames 
the importance of surface topography and its effect on properties; it also outlines some of the 
critical knowledge gaps that impede progress toward optimally performing surfaces.

Introduction: Surface topography 
as a multiscale material parameter 
stretching from the size of a component 
down to the atomic scale
A surface is a planar defect, the outermost layer of a mate-
rial. Depending on context, it can refer to the outermost 
atoms, or it can include some depth of near-surface mate-
rial. The  geometry  of  this  surface  is  a  two-dimensional 
contour, the surface topography. The series of articles in 
this issue describe how, besides the chemical composition 
of the material itself, this arbitrarily complex shape of the 
boundary between a material and the outside world plays a 
key role in determining the surface properties of that mate-
rial. Surface topography can control whether paints and 
coatings flake off of a consumer product, how much energy 
is wasted in automobile and airplane engines, how quickly 
a cutting tool wears out, the biocompatibilty of a medical 
device, and whether a flooring tile will cause slip-and-fall 
injuries.

We contend that the conventional ways of measuring and 
describing surface topography impede advancement in this 
area. Common reference standards (e.g., ISO 4287 or ASTM 
B46) specify that a surface topography measurement should 

be separated into three components: large-scale waviness, 
medium-to-small-scale roughness, and small-scale noise. 
For example, for the commonly used stylus profilometer, 
“noise” is typically defined as topography below 2.5 μm of 
lateral size scale (or wavelength), whereas “waviness” is 
commonly defined as topography with wavelength larger 
than  80,  250,  or  800  μm  (depending  on  topography  and 
measurement conditions), with everything in between des-
ignated as “roughness.” These distinctions serve a practical 
purpose in a machine shop, where large-scale machining 
defects can be considered “waviness,” and polishing or other 
finishing techniques can be used to control “roughness.” 
However, we contend that these distinctions impede the sci-
entific understanding of topography-dependent properties 
because the final performance of the part often depends on 
all scales of topography and does not acknowledge these 
arbitrary distinctions.

We advocate instead to think of the surface topography 
as a multiscale material parameter, which stretches from the 
size of a component down to the atomic scale. In an extreme 
case, the size of the component could be on geologic scales: 
In this issue, Aghababaei et al.1 discuss earthquake faults 
(Figure 1a), where surface topography has been measured 

Tevis D.B. Jacobs , Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA; tjacobs@pitt.edu
Lars Pastewka , Department of Microsystems Engineering, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; Cluster of Excellence livMatS, Freiburg Center for Interactive Materials and Bioinspired 
Technologies, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; lars.pastewka@imtek.uni-freiburg.de
Guest Editors, 
*Corresponding author

doi:10.1557/s43577-022-00465-5

© The Author(s) 2022

MRS BULLETIN  •  VOLUME 47 •  DEcEMbEr 2022  •  mrs.org/bulletin               1205

SUrfacE tOpOgraphy aS a MatEriaL paraMEtEr

a

b

–

Figure 1.   Surface topography can range from kilometers to the atomic scale. 
(a) The Corona Heights Fault in San Francisco, Calif., provides an example 
of the multiscale nature of roughness, where roughness features exist over 
length scales from tens of kilometers down to microns. The surface topog-
raphy shows self-affine fractal-like scaling, here manifested as a power-law 
C(q) ∝ q−1−2H in the PSD, over this whole range. (b) The topography of 
ultrananocrystalline diamond, a common wear-resistant coating, deviates 
from self-affine behavior, but still shows roughness across a wide range of 
scales from centimeters to Ångströms. TEM, transmission electron micros-
copy; LIDAR, light detection and ranging. (a) Adapted with permission from 
Reference 3. © 2012 American Geophysical Union. (b) Adapted with permis-
sion from Reference 4. © 2018 American Chemical Society.

for the same fault on scales stretching from 100 km down 
to the scale of micrometers with common scale-independent 
features across all scales. Describing the multiscale nature 
of surface topography requires spectral analysis, rather than 
simple scalar metrics. One such example is the power spectral 
density (PSD), which is a mathematical tool for decomposing 
a surface into contributions from different spatial frequencies 
(wave vectors).2 An example of the multiscale roughness of 
an engineering material is given in Figure 1b, where a wear-
resistant diamond coating has been characterized from centim-
eters down to the atomic scale. Taken together, the examples 
of Figure 1 illustrate that roughness features can exist, and can 
be statistically characterized, over more than 16 decades in 
length. All of this multi-scale surface structure can contribute 
to surface performance.

1206     

   MRS BULLETIN  •  VOLUME 47  •  DEcEMbEr 2022  •  mrs.org/bulletin

Concept: Surface topography is analogous 
to material microstructure
It  is  well  known  within  the  materials  community  that 
microstructure is a critical properties-controlling aspect 
of a material. Whereas some properties such as elastic 
modulus can be predicted solely from knowledge of the 
type of material and its bonding configuration, many other 
functional properties are governed by the material’s micro-
structure; these include yield strength, fracture toughness, 
electrical conductivity, and diffusivity, among others. Spe-
cifically, the microstructure comprises the arrangement of 
crystal grains in the material, their size and orientation, as 
well as the density and distribution of crystal defects or 
inclusions or second phases. The performance of a mate-
rial cannot be truly predicted without knowledge of that 
material’s microstructure.

Furthermore, microstructural features exist across many 
orders of length scale. Vacancies, interstitials, and substi-
tutional defects exist at the atomic scale, and can have a 
critical impact on strength through the interaction of their 
stress fields with dislocations. Other microstructural fea-
tures, such as dislocations, twin boundaries, grains and grain 
boundaries, second phases, and voids or pores can range in 
size scale from tens or hundreds of nanometers up to the 
millimeter scale or larger. Describing and optimizing the 
multiscale dependence of properties on microstructure is 
a grand challenge in materials science right now, which is 
captured in priority research directions at the US National 
Science Foundation (“property prediction across length 
scales”5) and the US Department of Energy (“develop mul-
tiscale and multiphysics capabilities [for] multiple length 
and time scales”6).

A similar grand challenge exists for the understanding 
and optimization of surface topography to control surface 
properties. Similar to microstructure’s effect on bulk proper-
ties, the surface topography has a controlling effect on the 
performance of the surface. Similar to microstructure, indi-
vidual topography features can be as small as the size of an 
atomic defect, or can be as large as the size of the component 
(see Figure 1). Similar to microstructure, surface topography 
can be modified through the processing of materials. For these 
reasons, we propose that the conceptual Materials Tetrahedron 
(Figure 2a) be complemented by the Surface Tetrahedron (Fig-
ure 2b), with surface topography as an integral part.

Unlike microstructure, surface topography often exhibits 
scale-invariance,7,8  which means  that  measurements  per-
formed at one scale can, in many cases, be used to extrapo-
late structure at other scales. It also makes surface topogra-
phy especially amenable to multiscale theory and modeling, 
which has made significant strides in the last two decades as 
discussed later in the issue. Additionally, a key realization 
of prior research is that functional properties are often pri-
marily controlled by topographic features over a specific range 
of scales, where roughness at larger and smaller scales plays 

a

b

SUrfacE tOpOgraphy aS a MatEriaL paraMEtEr

The need for this issue 
of MRS Bulletin: Despite 
more than 100 years 
of investigation, 
we still cannot 
predict and control 
topography‑dependent 
properties
It  was  110  years  ago  that 
 Binder 21  measured  that  the 
electrical  conductivity  of 
rough surfaces was lower than 
expected and attributed this to 
a reduction in contact area due 
to  surface  roughness.  In  the 
following decades, significant 
effort  went  into  understand-
ing  surface  topography  and 
topography-dependent proper-
ties. Experimentally, empirical 
truths were learned such as that 
the true contact area between 
rough  surfaces  increases  in 
direct proportion to the load applied. For characterization, 
there was a proliferation of tools to measure roughness, from 
stylus profilometry to white-light interferometry to the atomic 
force microscope. The theory and modeling of topography-
dependent properties has been especially successful. Early 
models,  such  as  the  famous  Greenwood  and  Williamson 
model,22 used oversimplifying assumptions, but accurately 
captured certain trends in behavior and prompted the scientific 
community to think quantitatively about roughness. Recent 
models, especially by Persson,11,23 described in this issue,24 
take account of the multiscale roughness, and result in far more 
accurate predictions. Also, in recent decades, the atomistic 
simulation and numerical modeling has made great strides in 
directly describing and predicting behavior; the progress in 
this area is summarized by Müser and  Nicola25 in this issue.

However, despite these advancements, the community as 
a whole still remains unable to reliably apply these models 
to real-world surfaces. A useful example of such a failing is 
provided by a review in the field of bone-tissue engineer-
ing.26 In this article, the authors discussed the topic of creat-
ing scaffolds to induce bone growth and reviewed various 
aspects of the materials and design and their impact on the 
growth of bone cells. However, when it came to surface 
topography, the authors concluded the following: “Over-
all, the effect of surface roughness (at both the nano- and 
micron-scales) and grain size on cell adhesion is inconclu-
sive due to contradicting data in the literature.” (p. 8041)

There were simply too many articles showing that cell 
adhesion increased with roughness (such as Reference 27) 
and too many articles showing that cell adhesion decreased 
with roughness (such as Reference 28). The problem is not 

MRS BULLETIN  •  VOLUME 47  •  DEcEMbEr 2022  •  mrs.org/bulletin               1207

Figure 2.   The surface tetrahedron. We propose to think about surfaces in terms of structure–process-
ing–property relationships. Just like the classical materials tetrahedron (a), these relationships can be 
described schematically by the surface tetrahedron (b).

little or no role. However, the specific scale that matters is 
context-dependent.

It is possible to broadly categorize some of the key surface 
properties by the size scale that dominates their performance. 
We have condensed this knowledge into the conceptual repre-
sentation of Figure 3. We note that some properties, such as 
friction, adhesion, and wear cannot be attributed to a single 
size scale because their dependence on topography depends 
on the material, and because the scientific understanding is still 
emerging through active research. But other important proper-
ties such as the elastic contact  area9–12 or contact  stiffness13–17 
have  been  shown  to  clearly  depend  on  a  limited  range  of 
topographic features. Yet other properties depend on multiple 
distinct scales, such as electric or thermal conductivity that is 
determined by a combination of a resistance due to constricting 
the current toward the contacting spots at a rough  interface18 
(that behaves similar to the contact stiffness) and also a contact 
 resistivity19 (that is proportional to the total contact area).

We can also map onto the same space the characterization 
techniques that are able to capture the corresponding scales. 
For example, certain properties such as the contact stiffness 
are controlled by large-scale topography and therefore can be 
understood and controlled by measuring a surface using a sty-
lus or optical profilometer. By contrast, certain other properties 
such as the contact area (and potentially its derived properties 
like friction) are controlled by the very smallest-scale topog-
raphy, and therefore, require techniques with far better resolu-
tion. Further refinement is still needed of this understanding 
of which properties are controlled by topography at which 
scales, and thus which processing and characterization tools 
are required for different applications.

SUrfacE tOpOgraphy aS a MatEriaL paraMEtEr

a

b

Figure 3.   Size scales that control behavior, and techniques that can 
measure at different sizes. (a) A contemporary electric vehicle has 
many interfaces whose properties are crucial for its function. (b) Most 
functional surface properties are governed primarily by certain ranges 
of size scales. Surface-measurement techniques are also confined to 
certain length scales, such that multiple methods must be combined for 
comprehensive topography characterization. AFM, atomic force micros-
copy; RADAR, radio detection and ranging; LIDAR, light detection and 
ranging. Image of the electric vehicle from Reference 20, reprinted with 
permission by L.I.F. Cabrera.

that the individual studies were performed badly or were 
inconclusive in isolation; the problem is that the standard 
practices for measuring and reporting topography give only 
an incomplete picture of the roughness of a surface.

The community still remains unable to reliably modify 
surface roughness to control properties. Typical net-shape 
manufacturing processes yield an uncontrolled, and often 
quite rough, surface finish. The present solution is then to 
postprocess a part (e.g., through processes such as polishing, 
lapping, honing, or grinding). Some surface-modification 
techniques have been developed (as described in this issue 
by Costa et al.29) to intentionally impart topographic fea-
tures to the component, yet further work is required to better 

1208     

   MRS BULLETIN  •  VOLUME 47  •  DEcEMbEr 2022  •  mrs.org/bulletin

understand this process and to design specific topographies 
to achieve certain functional surface properties.

A  key  impediment  to  fundamental  understanding  and 
control  of  surface  topography  is  the  current  practice  in 
topography measurement. The most common practice for 
measuring topography of manufactured components is to use 
a stylus or optical profilometer, and to use this to measure a 
simple roughness parameter such as average deviation from 
the mean height Ra, or root-mean-square deviation from 
the mean height Rq. However, the key limitation of current 
practice is that typical roughness techniques and metrics 
capture only a limited range of scales. By filtering out the 
large and small scales, typical roughness metrics focus pri-
marily on the range of tens to hundreds of microns. This 
range of sizes will govern only a subset of properties (see 
Figure  3) and will have little or no predictive power for 
many other surface properties. Additionally, because of the 
finite tip radius of a stylus tool and the diffraction limit of 
light, commonly used techniques do not accurately measure 
topography below a few microns. Even when atomic force 
microscopy is used to capture smaller scales, it is rarely 
combined with large-scale topography for a full description. 
For these reasons it is, in many cases, impossible to find 
meaningful correlations between conventional roughness 
metrics, such as Ra or Rq, and performance metrics such as 
adhesion, friction, or surface stiffness.

Recent advances and future prospects 
for understanding and controlling surface 
performance through surface topography
This issue contains five articles targeted at explaining the 
recent advancements and future directions for the field. The 
first  section  contains  two  articles  about  the  fundamental 
understanding of topography-dependent properties.  Persson24 
describes his seminal theory of multiscale roughness, and 
describes a few of the applications for which it has found util-
ity. This theory revolutionized the understanding of topog-
raphy and pushed other practitioners in the field (theorists, 
modelers, and even experimentalists) to account for many 
different size scales of topography. Müser and  Nicola25 then 
describe recent advances in the modeling and simulation of the 
properties of rough surfaces. Unlike analytical theory, which 
must make simplifying mathematical assumptions about the 
behavior of the surfaces, these models and theories can con-
sider arbitrarily complex geometries, can include atomistic 
detail such as the role of dislocations in near-surface plasticity, 
and solve by “brute force” calculations contact problems that 
are analytically intractable.

The  second  section  contains  three  articles  about  the 
understanding  of  real-world  surfaces. Aghababaei et  al.1 
address the basic question of how topography emerges on 
surfaces. This covers both natural surfaces, including an 
earthquake fault line, as well as human-made surfaces during 
manufacture and use. Weber et al.30 describe experimental 

SUrfacE tOpOgraphy aS a MatEriaL paraMEtEr

observation  of  adhesion  and  friction  of  rough  surfaces. 
Focusing on dry, unlubricated contacts, they show the dis-
parate physics governing the performance of hard and soft 
materials in contact with rough surfaces. Finally, Costa et 
al.29 describe how surface patterning can be used to inten-
tionally modify adhesion, friction, or heat transfer. The arti-
cle covers both conventional and additively manufactured 
components, as well as a variety of environments, including 
dry, wet, and lubricated.

Missing links to achieving a comprehensive 
and predictive understanding of surface 
topography
Together, the present collection of articles attempts to capture 
the current state of knowledge in controlling surface perfor-
mance through surface topography. Each article also contains 
some insights about the future prospects and critical questions 
in that particular area. In order to continue advancing this field 
to the point where we can controllably tailor surface perfor-
mance, we see that three things are needed:

First, the roughness-focused community needs to move 
away  from  conventional  approaches,  such  as  measuring 
topography using one technique and then computing sim-
ple scalar metrics (e.g., Ra); instead moving toward novel 
approaches, such as measuring topography using many dif-
ferent techniques and then combining their results using mul-
tiscale metrics. So long as simple scalar metrics (any scalar 
metrics) constitute the most commonly used descriptor, then 
physics-based predictions will remain impossible. Instead, if 
multiscale metrics are used (any multiscale metrics), then there 
is a greater chance of incorporating real physical phenomena 
and getting closer to fundamental understanding and control.
Second, materials-science researchers need to begin pub-
lishing their topography data (not just computed metrics) 
along with their scientific publications. In general, the mate-
rials-science community has recognized and embraced the 
open-data revolution, and it is becoming increasingly common 
for researchers to publish the raw data collected during their 
investigations. Indeed, some funding agencies and journals 
are now requiring it. However, when it comes to topography, 
this frequently means publishing only metrics, such as Ra or 
the PSD. To achieve significant advances, researchers must 
more commonly publish their raw topography data, and do 
so in accordance with the principles of FAIR data,31 which 
are just starting to be embraced in the tribology and surface-
roughness communities.32,33 One way to publish topography 
data in an accessible format with a Digital Object Identifier 
(DOI) is to use the contact.engineering platform developed by 
the present authors.33 Regardless of platform, the publication 
of topography data will reduce the gulf that currently exists 
between modelers, who have accurate theory/simulations of 
topography-dependent performance but inadequate access to 
the topography of real-world surfaces, and experimentalists, 

who have access to real-world surfaces but typically lack the 
specialized knowledge and computing resources to implement 
complex theories or models.

Third, new metrics are required to describe and report the 
surface topography adequately. Although the power spectral 
density is widely used, including by the present authors, it 
has its own limitations, including a lack of phase informa-
tion, ambiguity of implementation, and difficulty of interpret-
ing. Other multiscale metrics have their own advantages and 
limitations. Also, statistical parameters inherently describe 
the global statistics of a surface, but fail to capture specific 
features that could, in some cases, be relevant to performance. 
Therefore, we hope that the field will continue to find new 
and better metrics that address these limitations. It is unlikely 
that some perfect metric will be discovered that is appropriate 
for all cases; it is far more likely that our understanding will 
develop and it will turn out that different metrics are particu-
larly useful for different physical situations.

Finally, at the time of this writing, the authors are conducting 
the Surface Topography Challenge,34 in which standard samples 
are being sent out to any interested research group that focuses 
on measuring surfaces and their properties. At the completion 
of the challenge all submitted data will be published for all to 
see and access. The objectives of this Challenge are in align-
ment with the needs previously identified: further insight into 
the strengths and limitations of various techniques for measur-
ing topography; the open publication of the most comprehensive 
statistical description of a surface ever created; and the release 
of such a surface so that theorists, simulators, and modelers can 
apply their calculations to this real-world surface, and also sug-
gest new metrics for describing surface topography.

Conclusion
In conclusion, we urge the materials-science community to 
view surface topography as a material property. Using the con-
cept of the surface tetrahedron, the performance of a material’s 
surface can be understood and controlled analogously to how 
we routinely modify bulk material parameters. The ultimate 
goal for the field is to be able to systematically design, impart, 
and measure surface topography for the rational control of sur-
face properties from adhesion to friction to biocompatibility to 
electrical and thermal transport across a contacting interface. 
The recent advances described in the present issue, and ongo-
ing fundamental investigations in the field, are moving the 
community toward achieving this goal.

Funding 
Open Access  funding  enabled  and  organized  by  Projekt 
DEAL.  Funding  was  provided  by  the European  Research 
Council (StG 757343), Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft 
(PA 2023/2, EXC 2193/1– 390951807), the National Science 
Foundation (CMMI-1844739), and the National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health (R21OH012126).

MRS BULLETIN  •  VOLUME 47  •  DEcEMbEr 2022  •  mrs.org/bulletin               1209

SUrfacE tOpOgraphy aS a MatEriaL paraMEtEr

Conflict of interest 
On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that 
there is no conflict of interest.

Open access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribu-
tion 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original 
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the 
article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated other-
wise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included 
in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the 
permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit 
http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.

References
 1.  R. Aghababaei, E. Brodsky, J.-F. Molinari, S. Chandrasekar, MRS Bull.  47(12) 
(2022)
 2.  T.D.B. Jacobs, T. Junge, L. Pastewka, Surf. Topogr. Metrol. Prop. 5, 013001 (2017)
 3.  T. Candela, F. Renard, Y. Klinger, K. Mair, J. Schmittbuhl, E.E. Brodsky, J. Geophys. 
Res. 117, B08409 (2012)
 4.  A. Gujrati, S.R. Khanal, L. Pastewka, T.D.B. Jacobs, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 
29169 (2018)
 5.  J. Allison, D. Bahr, S. Baker, E. Cerreta, N. Chawla, M. DeGraef, D. Dimiduk, J. Erle-
bacher, J. Evans, K. Fahey, K. Findley, E. George, D. Gianola, P. Gumbsch, G.R. Gray III, 
C. Handwerker, E. Holm, W. Jones, S. Kalidindi, S. Kang, D. Lados, R. LeSar, C. Levi, J. 
Lewandoski, D. Lewis, Q. Li, Z.-K. Liu, M. Manuel, E. Marquis, M. Mills, A. Mottura, B. 
Mueller, R. Odette, V. Ozolins, T. Pollock, B. Reynolds, A. Rollett, M. Sangid, T. Schaedler, 
C. Schuh, D. Shih, E. Taleff, D. Trinkle, A. Van der Ven, K. Vecchio, P. Voorhees, Emerg-
ing Science and National Priorities in Metals and Metallic Nanostructures (National 
Science Foundation, Washington, DC, 2012)
 6.  G. Galli, T. Dunning, M. Head-Gordon, G. Kotliar, J.C. Grossmann, K.-M. Ho, M.-Y. 
Chou, M. Dupuis, M. Asta, C. Simmerling, Discovery in Basic Energy Sciences: The 
Role of Computing at the Extreme Scale (US Department of Energy, Washington, DC, 
2009)
 7.  B. Mandelbrot, Science 156, 636 (1967)
 8.  B.B. Mandelbrot, D.E. Passoja, A.J. Paullay, Nature 308, 721 (1984)
 9.  A.W. Bush, R.D. Gibson, T.R. Thomas, Wear 35, 87 (1975)
 10.  S. Hyun, L. Pei, J.-F. Molinari, M.O. Robbins, Phys. Rev. E 70, 026117 (2004)
 11.  B.N.J. Persson, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 3840 (2001)
 12.  B.N.J. Persson, E. Tosatti, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 5597 (2001)
 13.  P. Berthoud, T. Baumberger, Proc. R. Soc. A 454(1974), 1615 (1998)
 14.  S. Akarapu, T. Sharp, M.O. Robbins, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 204301 (2011)
 15.  C. Campañá, B.N.J. Persson, M.H. Müser, J. Phys. Condens. Matter. 23, 085001 
(2011)
 16.  R. Pohrt, V.L. Popov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 104301 (2012)
 17.  L. Pastewka, N. Prodanov, B. Lorenz, M.H. Müser, M.O. Robbins, B.N.J. Persson, 
Phys. Rev. E 87, 062809 (2013)
 18.  J.R. Barber, Phys. Rev. E 87, 013203 (2013)
 19.  B. Gotsmann, M.A. Lantz, Nat. Mater. 12, 59 (2013)

 20.  L.I. Farfan-Cabrera, M. Tapia-Gaspar, J. Pérez-González, “Tribology of Polymer 
Matrix Composites Within the Automotive Industry,” in Reference Module in Materials 
Science and Materials Engineering (Elsevier, New York, 2021)
 21.  L. Binder, Elektrotechnik und Maschinenbau 30, 781 (1912)
 22.  J.A. Greenwood, J.B.P. Williamson, Proc. R. Soc. A 295, 300 (1966)
 23.  B.N.J. Persson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 116101 (2001)
 24.  B.N.J. Persson, MRS Bull. 47(12) (2022)
 25.  M.H. Müser, L. Nicola, MRS Bull. 47(12) (2022)
 26.  S. Samavedi, A.R. Whittington, A.S. Goldstein, Acta Biomater. 9(9), 8037 (2013)
 27.  N.J. Hallab, K.J. Bundy, K. O’Connor, R.L. Moses, J.J. Jacobs, Tissue Eng. 7, 55 (2001)
 28.  V. Brunetti, G. Maiorano, L. Rizzello, B. Sorce, S. Sabella, R. Cingolani, P.P. Pompa, 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 6264 (2010)
 29.  H.L. Costa, F.J. Profito, X. Zhang, K.A. Thole, MRS Bull. 47(12) (2022)
 30.  B. Weber, J. Scheibert, M.P. de Boer, A. Dhinojwala, MRS Bull. 47(12) (2022)
 31.  M.D. Wilkinson, M. Dumontier, U.J. Aalbersberg, G. Appleton, M. Axton, A. Baak, 
N. Blomberg, J.-W. Boiten, L. Bonino da Silva Santos, P.E. Bourne, J. Bouwman, A.J. 
Brookes, T. Clark, M. Crosas, I. Dillo, O. Dumon, S. Edmunds, C.T. Evelo, R. Finkers, A. 
Gonzalez-Beltran, A.J.G. Gray, P. Groth, C. Goble, J.S. Grethe, J. Heringa, P.A.C ’t Hoen, 
R. Hooft, T. Kuhn, R. Kok, J. Kok, S.J. Lusher, M.E. Martone, A. Mons, A.L. Packer, B. 
Persson, P. Rocca-Serra, M. Roos, R. van Schaik, S.-A. Sansone, E. Schultes, T. Seng-
stag, T. Slater, G. Strawn, M.A. Swertz, M. Thompson, J. van der Lei, E. van Mulligen, J. 
Velterop, A. Waagmeester, P. Wittenburg, K. Wolstencroft, J. Zhao, B. Mons, Sci. Data 3, 
160018 (2016)
 32.  N.T. Garabedian, P.J. Schreiber, N. Brandt, P. Zschumme, I.L. Blatter, A. Dollmann, 
C. Haug, D. Kümmel, Y. Li, F. Meyer, C.E. Morstein, J.S. Rau, M. Weber, J. Schneider, P. 
Gumbsch, M. Selzer, C. Greiner, Sci Data 9, 315 (2022)
 33.  M.C. Röttger, A. Sanner, L.A. Thimons, T. Junge, A. Gujrati, J.M. Monti, W.G. 
Nöhring, T.D.B. Jacobs, L. Pastewka, Surf. Topogr. Metrol. Prop. 10, 035032 (2022)
 34.  T.D.B. Jacobs, N. Miller, M.H. Müser, L. Pastewka, The surface-topography chal-
lenge: Problem definition (2022). http:// arxiv. org/ abs/ 2206. 13384
⃞

Publisher’s note 
Springer  Nature  remains  neutral  with  regard  to  jurisdictional  claims  in  published 
maps and institutional affiliations.

Tevis D.B. Jacobs  is a Whiteford Fellow and 
associate  professor  in  the  Department  of 
Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science 
at the University of Pittsburgh. He received his 
PhD  degree  and  completed  postdoctoral 
research at the University of Pennsylvania, and 
earned his MSc and MPhil degrees from Stan-
ford University and Cambridge University, UK, 
respectively. He received the National Science 
Foundation CAREER Award and the Early Career 
Award  from  the  Society  of  Tribologists  and 
Lubrication Engineers. His research uncovers 
the atomic-scale mechanisms governing the 
properties of surfaces. Jacobs can be reached 
by email at tjacobs@pitt.edu.

Lars Pastewka  is a professor in the Department 
of Microsystems Engineering at the University of 
Freiburg,  Germany.  After  receiving  his  PhD 
degree from the same university, he held a post-
doctoral position at Johns Hopkins University and 
headed a junior research group at Karlsruhe Insti-
tute of Technology, Germany. He is the recipient of 
Fulbright,  Marie  Skłodowska-Curie  and 
Emmy Noether Awards and has received a Euro-
pean Research Council Starting Grant. His research 
uses computer simulations to study contact, adhe-
sion, and friction. Pastewka can be reached by 
email at lars.pastewka@imtek.uni-freiburg.de.

1210     

   MRS BULLETIN  •  VOLUME 47  •  DEcEMbEr 2022  •  mrs.org/bulletin

